docs/features/sql/flint-query-scheduler.md, before:

# Flint Query Scheduler

## Summary

The Flint Query Scheduler is an external scheduling mechanism for managing automatic index refreshes in OpenSearch's async query feature. It integrates with the OpenSearch Job Scheduler plugin to provide cost-effective, observable, and controllable refresh operations for Flint indexes (skipping indexes, covering indexes, and materialized views) used with external data sources like Amazon S3.

Key benefits:
- **Cost reduction**: Eliminates the need for continuously running driver nodes for auto-refresh
- **Improved observability**: Provides visibility into index states and refresh timing
- **Better control**: Allows flexible scheduling of refresh intervals
- **Simplified management**: Enables updates to index settings in a single query

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "User Interface"
        QueryWorkbench[Query Workbench]
        SQLAPI[SQL/PPL API]
    end
    
    subgraph "SQL Plugin"
        SQLPlugin[SQLPlugin<br/>JobSchedulerExtension]
        AsyncQueryService[AsyncQueryExecutorService]
        AsyncQueryScheduler[AsyncQueryScheduler<br/>Interface]
        OpenSearchScheduler[OpenSearchAsyncQueryScheduler]
    end
    
    subgraph "Job Scheduler Plugin"
        JobScheduler[JobScheduler]
        JobSweeper[JobSweeper]
        SchedulerIndex[.async-query-scheduler]
        LockIndex[.opendistro-job-scheduler-lock]
    end
    
    subgraph "Flint Operations"
        FlintIndexOpFactory[FlintIndexOpFactory]
        FlintIndexOpVacuum[FlintIndexOpVacuum]
        FlintIndexOpDrop[FlintIndexOpDrop]
        FlintIndexOpAlter[FlintIndexOpAlter]
    end
    
    subgraph "External Data Source"
        S3[Amazon S3]
        EMR[EMR Serverless]
    end
    
    QueryWorkbench --> SQLAPI
    SQLAPI --> AsyncQueryService
    AsyncQueryService --> FlintIndexOpFactory
    
    SQLPlugin -->|implements| AsyncQueryScheduler
    AsyncQueryScheduler -->|default impl| OpenSearchScheduler
    OpenSearchScheduler -->|creates/removes jobs| SchedulerIndex
    
    JobSweeper -->|monitors| SchedulerIndex
    JobScheduler -->|acquires lock| LockIndex
    JobScheduler -->|triggers refresh| EMR
    
    FlintIndexOpFactory -->|uses| AsyncQueryScheduler
    FlintIndexOpVacuum -->|unschedule| AsyncQueryScheduler
    FlintIndexOpDrop -->|unschedule| AsyncQueryScheduler
    FlintIndexOpAlter -->|update schedule| AsyncQueryScheduler
    
    EMR -->|reads data| S3
    EMR -->|writes index| SQLPlugin
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph "Index Creation"
        A1[CREATE INDEX with auto_refresh=true] --> A2[FlintIndexOpFactory]
        A2 --> A3[AsyncQueryScheduler.scheduleJob]
        A3 --> A4[Store job in .async-query-scheduler]
    end
    
    subgraph "Scheduled Refresh"
        B1[JobSweeper detects job] --> B2[JobScheduler triggers]
        B2 --> B3[Acquire lock]
        B3 --> B4[Execute refresh query via EMR]
        B4 --> B5[Update index data]
        B5 --> B6[Release lock]
    end
    
    subgraph "Index Operations"
        C1[DROP/VACUUM/ALTER] --> C2[FlintIndexOp]
        C2 --> C3[AsyncQueryScheduler.unscheduleJob]
        C3 --> C4[Remove from .async-query-scheduler]
    end
    
    A4 --> B1
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `AsyncQueryScheduler` | Interface defining scheduler operations (schedule, unschedule, update) |
| `OpenSearchAsyncQueryScheduler` | Default implementation using OpenSearch Job Scheduler |
| `AsyncQuerySchedulerRequest` | Data model for scheduler job requests |
| `OpenSearchRefreshIndexJob` | ScheduledJobRunner implementation for refresh operations |
| `OpenSearchRefreshIndexJobRequest` | Job request model implementing ScheduledJobParameter |
| `FlintIndexOpFactory` | Factory for Flint index operations with scheduler integration |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `plugins.query.executionengine.async_query.enabled` | Enable async query execution | `true` |
| `plugins.query.executionengine.async_query.external_scheduler.interval` | External scheduler check interval | `5 minutes` |
| `auto_refresh` | Enable automatic refresh for index | `false` |
| `refresh_interval` | Time between refresh operations | - |
| `scheduler_mode` | Scheduling mode (`internal` or `external`) | `external` |
| `checkpoint_location` | Path for refresh job checkpoints (required for external) | - |

### System Indexes

| Index | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `.async-query-scheduler` | Stores scheduled job metadata and configuration |
| `.opendistro-job-scheduler-lock` | Coordinates job execution to prevent overlapping refreshes |

### Usage Example

```sql
-- Create skipping index with external scheduler
CREATE SKIPPING INDEX my_skipping_index ON myglue.default.logs
(
    year PARTITION,
    month PARTITION,
    day PARTITION
)
WITH (
    auto_refresh = true,
    refresh_interval = '15 minutes',
    checkpoint_location = 's3://my-bucket/checkpoints/'
);

-- Create materialized view with external scheduler
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW myglue.default.hourly_stats AS
SELECT hour, COUNT(*) as count
FROM myglue.default.logs
GROUP BY hour
WITH (
    auto_refresh = true,
    refresh_interval = '1 hour'
);

-- Switch scheduler mode
ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW myglue.default.hourly_stats
WITH (scheduler_mode = 'internal');

-- Update refresh interval
ALTER INDEX my_skipping_index
WITH (refresh_interval = '30 minutes');

-- Disable auto-refresh
ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW myglue.default.hourly_stats
WITH (auto_refresh = false);

-- Monitor index status
SHOW FLINT INDEXES IN spark_catalog.default;

-- Inspect scheduler metadata
GET /.async-query-scheduler/_search
```

## Limitations

- External scheduler is designed for batch refresh operations, not low-latency streaming use cases
- Only one refresh operation can be active for any given index or materialized view at a time
- Requires EMR Serverless or compatible Spark environment for query execution
- Feature flag must be enabled for the scheduler to function
- `checkpoint_location` is required when using external scheduler mode

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v2.17.0 | [#2834](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/pull/2834) | Flint query scheduler part 1 - integrate job scheduler plugin |
| v2.17.0 | [#2961](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/pull/2961) | Flint query scheduler part 2 - scheduler service and Flint integration |
| v2.17.0 | [#2973](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/pull/2973) | Add feature flag for async query scheduler |

## References

- [Issue #2832](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/issues/2832): Integrate job scheduler plugin
- [Issue #2833](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/issues/2833): Introduce scheduling service
- [RFC #416](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-spark/issues/416): Direct Query External Query Scheduler
- [Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.17/dashboards/management/scheduled-query-acceleration/): Scheduled Query Acceleration
- [Flint Index Reference](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-spark/blob/main/docs/index.md): OpenSearch Spark documentation

## Change History

- **v2.17.0** (2024-09-17): Initial implementation with Job Scheduler integration, scheduler service, and feature flag support

Commit message:

docs: add SQL Scheduler bugfix report for v2.18.0

docs/features/sql/flint-query-scheduler.md, after:

# Flint Query Scheduler

## Summary

The Flint Query Scheduler is an external scheduling mechanism for managing automatic index refreshes in OpenSearch's async query feature. It integrates with the OpenSearch Job Scheduler plugin to provide cost-effective, observable, and controllable refresh operations for Flint indexes (skipping indexes, covering indexes, and materialized views) used with external data sources like Amazon S3.

Key benefits:
- **Cost reduction**: Eliminates the need for continuously running driver nodes for auto-refresh
- **Improved observability**: Provides visibility into index states and refresh timing
- **Better control**: Allows flexible scheduling of refresh intervals
- **Simplified management**: Enables updates to index settings in a single query

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "User Interface"
        QueryWorkbench[Query Workbench]
        SQLAPI[SQL/PPL API]
    end
    
    subgraph "SQL Plugin"
        SQLPlugin[SQLPlugin<br/>JobSchedulerExtension]
        AsyncQueryService[AsyncQueryExecutorService]
        AsyncQueryScheduler[AsyncQueryScheduler<br/>Interface]
        OpenSearchScheduler[OpenSearchAsyncQueryScheduler]
    end
    
    subgraph "Job Scheduler Plugin"
        JobScheduler[JobScheduler]
        JobSweeper[JobSweeper]
        SchedulerIndex[.async-query-scheduler]
        LockIndex[.opendistro-job-scheduler-lock]
    end
    
    subgraph "Flint Operations"
        FlintIndexOpFactory[FlintIndexOpFactory]
        FlintIndexOpVacuum[FlintIndexOpVacuum]
        FlintIndexOpDrop[FlintIndexOpDrop]
        FlintIndexOpAlter[FlintIndexOpAlter]
    end
    
    subgraph "External Data Source"
        S3[Amazon S3]
        EMR[EMR Serverless]
    end
    
    QueryWorkbench --> SQLAPI
    SQLAPI --> AsyncQueryService
    AsyncQueryService --> FlintIndexOpFactory
    
    SQLPlugin -->|implements| AsyncQueryScheduler
    AsyncQueryScheduler -->|default impl| OpenSearchScheduler
    OpenSearchScheduler -->|creates/removes jobs| SchedulerIndex
    
    JobSweeper -->|monitors| SchedulerIndex
    JobScheduler -->|acquires lock| LockIndex
    JobScheduler -->|triggers refresh| EMR
    
    FlintIndexOpFactory -->|uses| AsyncQueryScheduler
    FlintIndexOpVacuum -->|unschedule| AsyncQueryScheduler
    FlintIndexOpDrop -->|unschedule| AsyncQueryScheduler
    FlintIndexOpAlter -->|update schedule| AsyncQueryScheduler
    
    EMR -->|reads data| S3
    EMR -->|writes index| SQLPlugin
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph "Index Creation"
        A1[CREATE INDEX with auto_refresh=true] --> A2[FlintIndexOpFactory]
        A2 --> A3[AsyncQueryScheduler.scheduleJob]
        A3 --> A4[Store job in .async-query-scheduler]
    end
    
    subgraph "Scheduled Refresh"
        B1[JobSweeper detects job] --> B2[JobScheduler triggers]
        B2 --> B3[Acquire lock]
        B3 --> B4[Execute refresh query via EMR]
        B4 --> B5[Update index data]
        B5 --> B6[Release lock]
    end
    
    subgraph "Index Operations"
        C1[DROP/VACUUM/ALTER] --> C2[FlintIndexOp]
        C2 --> C3[AsyncQueryScheduler.unscheduleJob]
        C3 --> C4[Remove from .async-query-scheduler]
    end
    
    A4 --> B1
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `AsyncQueryScheduler` | Interface defining scheduler operations (schedule, unschedule, update) |
| `OpenSearchAsyncQueryScheduler` | Default implementation using OpenSearch Job Scheduler |
| `AsyncQuerySchedulerRequest` | Data model for scheduler job requests |
| `OpenSearchRefreshIndexJob` | ScheduledJobRunner implementation for refresh operations |
| `OpenSearchRefreshIndexJobRequest` | Job request model implementing ScheduledJobParameter |
| `FlintIndexOpFactory` | Factory for Flint index operations with scheduler integration |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `plugins.query.executionengine.async_query.enabled` | Enable async query execution | `true` |
| `plugins.query.executionengine.async_query.external_scheduler.interval` | External scheduler check interval | `5 minutes` |
| `auto_refresh` | Enable automatic refresh for index | `false` |
| `refresh_interval` | Time between refresh operations | - |
| `scheduler_mode` | Scheduling mode (`internal` or `external`) | `external` |
| `checkpoint_location` | Path for refresh job checkpoints (required for external) | - |

### System Indexes

| Index | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `.async-query-scheduler` | Stores scheduled job metadata and configuration |
| `.opendistro-job-scheduler-lock` | Coordinates job execution to prevent overlapping refreshes |

### Usage Example

```sql
-- Create skipping index with external scheduler
CREATE SKIPPING INDEX my_skipping_index ON myglue.default.logs
(
    year PARTITION,
    month PARTITION,
    day PARTITION
)
WITH (
    auto_refresh = true,
    refresh_interval = '15 minutes',
    checkpoint_location = 's3://my-bucket/checkpoints/'
);

-- Create materialized view with external scheduler
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW myglue.default.hourly_stats AS
SELECT hour, COUNT(*) as count
FROM myglue.default.logs
GROUP BY hour
WITH (
    auto_refresh = true,
    refresh_interval = '1 hour'
);

-- Switch scheduler mode
ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW myglue.default.hourly_stats
WITH (scheduler_mode = 'internal');

-- Update refresh interval
ALTER INDEX my_skipping_index
WITH (refresh_interval = '30 minutes');

-- Disable auto-refresh
ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW myglue.default.hourly_stats
WITH (auto_refresh = false);

-- Monitor index status
SHOW FLINT INDEXES IN spark_catalog.default;

-- Inspect scheduler metadata
GET /.async-query-scheduler/_search
```

## Limitations

- External scheduler is designed for batch refresh operations, not low-latency streaming use cases
- Only one refresh operation can be active for any given index or materialized view at a time
- Requires EMR Serverless or compatible Spark environment for query execution
- Feature flag must be enabled for the scheduler to function
- `checkpoint_location` is required when using external scheduler mode

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v2.18.0 | [#3097](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/pull/3097) | Remove scheduler index from SystemIndexDescriptor |
| v2.17.0 | [#2834](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/pull/2834) | Flint query scheduler part 1 - integrate job scheduler plugin |
| v2.17.0 | [#2961](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/pull/2961) | Flint query scheduler part 2 - scheduler service and Flint integration |
| v2.17.0 | [#2973](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/pull/2973) | Add feature flag for async query scheduler |

## References

- [Issue #2832](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/issues/2832): Integrate job scheduler plugin
- [Issue #2833](https://github.com/opensearch-project/sql/issues/2833): Introduce scheduling service
- [RFC #416](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-spark/issues/416): Direct Query External Query Scheduler
- [Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.18/dashboards/management/scheduled-query-acceleration/): Scheduled Query Acceleration
- [Flint Index Reference](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-spark/blob/main/docs/index.md): OpenSearch Spark documentation

## Change History

- **v2.18.0** (2024-10-23): Bugfix - Remove scheduler index from SystemIndexDescriptor to prevent conflicts with Job Scheduler plugin
- **v2.17.0** (2024-09-17): Initial implementation with Job Scheduler integration, scheduler service, and feature flag support
