docs/features/anomaly-detection/anomaly-detection.md, before:

# Anomaly Detection

## Summary

OpenSearch Anomaly Detection uses machine learning algorithms, specifically Random Cut Forest (RCF), to automatically identify unusual patterns in time-series data. It supports both real-time and historical analysis, single-entity and high-cardinality (multi-entity) detectors, and can monitor data across local and remote clusters. The plugin integrates with OpenSearch Dashboards for visualization and with the Alerting plugin for notifications.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Data Sources"
        IDX[OpenSearch Indices]
        REMOTE[Remote Clusters]
    end
    
    subgraph "Anomaly Detection Plugin"
        subgraph "Detection Engine"
            DET[Detector]
            RCF[Random Cut Forest Model]
            THRESH[Threshold Model]
        end
        
        subgraph "Execution"
            RT[Real-time Detection]
            HIST[Historical Analysis]
            JOB[Job Scheduler]
        end
        
        subgraph "Results"
            RESULT[Anomaly Results Index]
            CUSTOM[Custom Result Index]
        end
    end
    
    subgraph "Integration"
        DASH[OpenSearch Dashboards]
        ALERT[Alerting Plugin]
        API[REST API]
    end
    
    IDX --> DET
    REMOTE --> DET
    DET --> RCF
    RCF --> THRESH
    THRESH --> RT
    THRESH --> HIST
    JOB --> RT
    RT --> RESULT
    HIST --> RESULT
    RT --> CUSTOM
    RESULT --> DASH
    RESULT --> ALERT
    API --> DET
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph Input
        DATA[Time-series Data]
        CONFIG[Detector Config]
    end
    
    subgraph Processing
        FEAT[Feature Extraction]
        SHINGLE[Shingling]
        MODEL[RCF Model]
        SCORE[Anomaly Scoring]
    end
    
    subgraph Output
        GRADE[Anomaly Grade]
        CONF[Confidence Score]
        ATTR[Attribution]
    end
    
    DATA --> FEAT
    CONFIG --> FEAT
    FEAT --> SHINGLE
    SHINGLE --> MODEL
    MODEL --> SCORE
    SCORE --> GRADE
    SCORE --> CONF
    SCORE --> ATTR
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| Detector | Configuration defining data source, features, and detection parameters |
| Random Cut Forest (RCF) | Unsupervised ML algorithm for anomaly scoring |
| Threshold Model | Determines anomaly grade based on RCF scores |
| Job Scheduler | Executes real-time detection at configured intervals |
| Result Index | Stores anomaly detection results |
| Category Field | Enables high-cardinality detection by grouping entities |

### Detector Types

| Type | Description | Use Case |
|------|-------------|----------|
| Single-entity | One model for entire data stream | Simple metrics monitoring |
| High-cardinality (HC) | Separate model per entity | Per-host, per-user monitoring |
| Real-time | Continuous detection | Live monitoring and alerting |
| Historical | Batch analysis over time range | Root cause analysis, backtesting |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `detection_interval` | Time between detection runs | Required |
| `window_delay` | Extra time for data collection | 1 minute |
| `shingle_size` | Number of intervals for pattern detection | 8 |
| `category_field` | Field(s) for entity grouping | None (single-entity) |
| `result_index` | Custom index for results | `.opensearch-anomaly-results*` |
| `filter_query` | Query to filter input data | Match all |

### API Endpoints

| Endpoint | Method | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `/_plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors` | POST | Create detector |
| `/_plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors/<id>` | GET | Get detector |
| `/_plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors/<id>` | PUT | Update detector |
| `/_plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors/<id>` | DELETE | Delete detector |
| `/_plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors/<id>/_start` | POST | Start detection |
| `/_plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors/<id>/_stop` | POST | Stop detection |
| `/_plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors/<id>/_profile` | GET | Get detector profile |
| `/_plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors/results/_search` | POST | Search results |

### Usage Example

#### Create a Single-Entity Detector

```json
POST _plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors
{
  "name": "cpu-anomaly-detector",
  "description": "Detect CPU usage anomalies",
  "time_field": "timestamp",
  "indices": ["server-metrics-*"],
  "feature_attributes": [
    {
      "feature_name": "avg_cpu",
      "feature_enabled": true,
      "aggregation_query": {
        "avg_cpu": {
          "avg": {
            "field": "cpu_usage"
          }
        }
      }
    }
  ],
  "detection_interval": {
    "period": {
      "interval": 5,
      "unit": "Minutes"
    }
  },
  "window_delay": {
    "period": {
      "interval": 1,
      "unit": "Minutes"
    }
  }
}
```

#### Create a High-Cardinality Detector

```json
POST _plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors
{
  "name": "per-host-cpu-detector",
  "description": "Detect CPU anomalies per host",
  "time_field": "timestamp",
  "indices": ["server-metrics-*"],
  "feature_attributes": [
    {
      "feature_name": "avg_cpu",
      "feature_enabled": true,
      "aggregation_query": {
        "avg_cpu": {
          "avg": {
            "field": "cpu_usage"
          }
        }
      }
    }
  ],
  "category_field": ["host.name"],
  "detection_interval": {
    "period": {
      "interval": 5,
      "unit": "Minutes"
    }
  }
}
```

#### Start Historical Analysis

```json
POST _plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors/<detector_id>/_start
{
  "start_time": 1633048868000,
  "end_time": 1633394468000
}
```

### Security Roles

| Role | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `anomaly_full_access` | Full access to all anomaly detection operations |
| `anomaly_read_access` | Read-only access to detectors and results |

## Limitations

- Maximum 2 category fields per high-cardinality detector
- Real-time detection requires Job Scheduler plugin
- Model training requires sufficient historical data (shingle_size × detection_interval)
- Custom result indices must be managed separately for deletion
- Cross-cluster detection requires proper cluster connectivity

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v3.0.0 | [#1460](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1460) | AWS SAM template for WAF log analysis |
| v3.0.0 | [#1446](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1446) | Distinguish local cluster when name matches remote |
| v3.0.0 | [#1424](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1424) | Fix breaking changes for 3.0.0 release |
| v3.0.0 | [#1450](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1450) | Java Agent migration (SecurityManager removal) |
| v3.0.0 | [#1441](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1441) | Dual cluster gradle run for development |
| v2.18.0 | [#887](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection-dashboards-plugin/pull/887) | Fix custom result index session not rendering issue |
| v2.18.0 | [#889](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection-dashboards-plugin/pull/889) | Fix historical analysis route and custom result index reset |
| v2.18.0 | [#898](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection-dashboards-plugin/pull/898) | Fix preview not considering rules and imputation options |
| v2.17.0 | [#1284](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1284) | Fix inference logic and standardize config index mapping |
| v2.17.0 | [#1287](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1287) | Prevent resetting latest flag of real-time when starting historical |
| v2.17.0 | [#1292](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1292) | Correct handling of null max aggregation values |
| v2.17.0 | [#828](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection-dashboards-plugin/pull/828) | Fix dataSourceId not showing in URL |
| v2.17.0 | [#837](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection-dashboards-plugin/pull/837) | Remove dataSourceFilter that breaks DataSourceView |

## References

- [Anomaly Detection Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/observing-your-data/ad/index/): Official documentation
- [Anomaly Detection API](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/observing-your-data/ad/api/): API reference
- [Anomaly Detection Security](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/observing-your-data/ad/security/): Security configuration
- [GitHub Repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection): Source code
- [Real-time Anomaly Detection Blog](https://opensearch.org/blog/real-time-anomaly-detection-in-open-distro-for-elasticsearch/): Introduction to anomaly detection
- [One Million Entities Blog](https://opensearch.org/blog/one-million-enitities-in-one-minute/): High-cardinality performance improvements

## Change History

- **v3.0.0** (2025-05-06): AWS SAM template for WAF logs, cross-cluster improvements, OpenSearch 3.0.0 compatibility updates, Java Agent migration
- **v2.18.0** (2024-11-05): Dashboards bugfixes for custom result index rendering, historical analysis route path, custom result index field reset, and preview support for suppression rules and imputation options
- **v2.17.0** (2024-09-17): Fixed inference logic with new `lastSeenExecutionEndTime` tracking, standardized config index mapping (`defaultFill` → `default_fill`), improved null checks for imputation options, bugfixes for real-time/historical task flag management, null aggregation handling, Dashboards data source integration
- **v2.x**: High-cardinality detection, historical analysis, custom result indices

Commit message:

docs: add anomaly detection enhancements report for v2.18.0 (#822)

docs/features/anomaly-detection/anomaly-detection.md, after:

# Anomaly Detection

## Summary

OpenSearch Anomaly Detection uses machine learning algorithms, specifically Random Cut Forest (RCF), to automatically identify unusual patterns in time-series data. It supports both real-time and historical analysis, single-entity and high-cardinality (multi-entity) detectors, and can monitor data across local and remote clusters. The plugin integrates with OpenSearch Dashboards for visualization and with the Alerting plugin for notifications.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Data Sources"
        IDX[OpenSearch Indices]
        REMOTE[Remote Clusters]
    end
    
    subgraph "Anomaly Detection Plugin"
        subgraph "Detection Engine"
            DET[Detector]
            RCF[Random Cut Forest Model]
            THRESH[Threshold Model]
        end
        
        subgraph "Execution"
            RT[Real-time Detection]
            HIST[Historical Analysis]
            JOB[Job Scheduler]
        end
        
        subgraph "Results"
            RESULT[Anomaly Results Index]
            CUSTOM[Custom Result Index]
        end
    end
    
    subgraph "Integration"
        DASH[OpenSearch Dashboards]
        ALERT[Alerting Plugin]
        API[REST API]
    end
    
    IDX --> DET
    REMOTE --> DET
    DET --> RCF
    RCF --> THRESH
    THRESH --> RT
    THRESH --> HIST
    JOB --> RT
    RT --> RESULT
    HIST --> RESULT
    RT --> CUSTOM
    RESULT --> DASH
    RESULT --> ALERT
    API --> DET
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph Input
        DATA[Time-series Data]
        CONFIG[Detector Config]
    end
    
    subgraph Processing
        FEAT[Feature Extraction]
        SHINGLE[Shingling]
        MODEL[RCF Model]
        SCORE[Anomaly Scoring]
    end
    
    subgraph Output
        GRADE[Anomaly Grade]
        CONF[Confidence Score]
        ATTR[Attribution]
    end
    
    DATA --> FEAT
    CONFIG --> FEAT
    FEAT --> SHINGLE
    SHINGLE --> MODEL
    MODEL --> SCORE
    SCORE --> GRADE
    SCORE --> CONF
    SCORE --> ATTR
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| Detector | Configuration defining data source, features, and detection parameters |
| Random Cut Forest (RCF) | Unsupervised ML algorithm for anomaly scoring |
| Threshold Model | Determines anomaly grade based on RCF scores |
| Job Scheduler | Executes real-time detection at configured intervals |
| Result Index | Stores anomaly detection results |
| Category Field | Enables high-cardinality detection by grouping entities |

### Detector Types

| Type | Description | Use Case |
|------|-------------|----------|
| Single-entity | One model for entire data stream | Simple metrics monitoring |
| High-cardinality (HC) | Separate model per entity | Per-host, per-user monitoring |
| Real-time | Continuous detection | Live monitoring and alerting |
| Historical | Batch analysis over time range | Root cause analysis, backtesting |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `detection_interval` | Time between detection runs | Required |
| `window_delay` | Extra time for data collection | 1 minute |
| `shingle_size` | Number of intervals for pattern detection | 8 |
| `category_field` | Field(s) for entity grouping | None (single-entity) |
| `result_index` | Custom index for results | `.opensearch-anomaly-results*` |
| `filter_query` | Query to filter input data | Match all |

### API Endpoints

| Endpoint | Method | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `/_plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors` | POST | Create detector |
| `/_plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors/<id>` | GET | Get detector |
| `/_plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors/<id>` | PUT | Update detector |
| `/_plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors/<id>` | DELETE | Delete detector |
| `/_plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors/<id>/_start` | POST | Start detection |
| `/_plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors/<id>/_stop` | POST | Stop detection |
| `/_plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors/<id>/_profile` | GET | Get detector profile |
| `/_plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors/results/_search` | POST | Search results |

### Usage Example

#### Create a Single-Entity Detector

```json
POST _plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors
{
  "name": "cpu-anomaly-detector",
  "description": "Detect CPU usage anomalies",
  "time_field": "timestamp",
  "indices": ["server-metrics-*"],
  "feature_attributes": [
    {
      "feature_name": "avg_cpu",
      "feature_enabled": true,
      "aggregation_query": {
        "avg_cpu": {
          "avg": {
            "field": "cpu_usage"
          }
        }
      }
    }
  ],
  "detection_interval": {
    "period": {
      "interval": 5,
      "unit": "Minutes"
    }
  },
  "window_delay": {
    "period": {
      "interval": 1,
      "unit": "Minutes"
    }
  }
}
```

#### Create a High-Cardinality Detector

```json
POST _plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors
{
  "name": "per-host-cpu-detector",
  "description": "Detect CPU anomalies per host",
  "time_field": "timestamp",
  "indices": ["server-metrics-*"],
  "feature_attributes": [
    {
      "feature_name": "avg_cpu",
      "feature_enabled": true,
      "aggregation_query": {
        "avg_cpu": {
          "avg": {
            "field": "cpu_usage"
          }
        }
      }
    }
  ],
  "category_field": ["host.name"],
  "detection_interval": {
    "period": {
      "interval": 5,
      "unit": "Minutes"
    }
  }
}
```

#### Start Historical Analysis

```json
POST _plugins/_anomaly_detection/detectors/<detector_id>/_start
{
  "start_time": 1633048868000,
  "end_time": 1633394468000
}
```

### Security Roles

| Role | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `anomaly_full_access` | Full access to all anomaly detection operations |
| `anomaly_read_access` | Read-only access to detectors and results |

## Limitations

- Maximum 2 category fields per high-cardinality detector
- Real-time detection requires Job Scheduler plugin
- Model training requires sufficient historical data (shingle_size × detection_interval)
- Custom result indices must be managed separately for deletion
- Cross-cluster detection requires proper cluster connectivity

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v3.0.0 | [#1460](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1460) | AWS SAM template for WAF log analysis |
| v3.0.0 | [#1446](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1446) | Distinguish local cluster when name matches remote |
| v3.0.0 | [#1424](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1424) | Fix breaking changes for 3.0.0 release |
| v3.0.0 | [#1450](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1450) | Java Agent migration (SecurityManager removal) |
| v3.0.0 | [#1441](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1441) | Dual cluster gradle run for development |
| v2.18.0 | [#1341](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1341) | Add rule validation in AnomalyDetector constructor |
| v2.18.0 | [#1334](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1334) | Bump RCF version and fix default rules bug |
| v2.18.0 | [#887](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection-dashboards-plugin/pull/887) | Fix custom result index session not rendering issue |
| v2.18.0 | [#889](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection-dashboards-plugin/pull/889) | Fix historical analysis route and custom result index reset |
| v2.18.0 | [#898](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection-dashboards-plugin/pull/898) | Fix preview not considering rules and imputation options |
| v2.17.0 | [#1284](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1284) | Fix inference logic and standardize config index mapping |
| v2.17.0 | [#1287](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1287) | Prevent resetting latest flag of real-time when starting historical |
| v2.17.0 | [#1292](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1292) | Correct handling of null max aggregation values |
| v2.17.0 | [#828](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection-dashboards-plugin/pull/828) | Fix dataSourceId not showing in URL |
| v2.17.0 | [#837](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection-dashboards-plugin/pull/837) | Remove dataSourceFilter that breaks DataSourceView |

## References

- [Anomaly Detection Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/observing-your-data/ad/index/): Official documentation
- [Anomaly Detection API](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/observing-your-data/ad/api/): API reference
- [Anomaly Detection Security](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/observing-your-data/ad/security/): Security configuration
- [GitHub Repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection): Source code
- [Real-time Anomaly Detection Blog](https://opensearch.org/blog/real-time-anomaly-detection-in-open-distro-for-elasticsearch/): Introduction to anomaly detection
- [One Million Entities Blog](https://opensearch.org/blog/one-million-enitities-in-one-minute/): High-cardinality performance improvements

## Change History

- **v3.0.0** (2025-05-06): AWS SAM template for WAF logs, cross-cluster improvements, OpenSearch 3.0.0 compatibility updates, Java Agent migration
- **v2.18.0** (2024-11-05): Added suppression rule validation in AnomalyDetector constructor for immediate feedback on configuration errors, fixed default rules bug when empty ruleset provided, upgraded RCF to v4.2.0, Dashboards bugfixes for custom result index rendering, historical analysis route path, custom result index field reset, and preview support for suppression rules and imputation options
- **v2.17.0** (2024-09-17): Fixed inference logic with new `lastSeenExecutionEndTime` tracking, standardized config index mapping (`defaultFill` → `default_fill`), improved null checks for imputation options, bugfixes for real-time/historical task flag management, null aggregation handling, Dashboards data source integration
- **v2.x**: High-cardinality detection, historical analysis, custom result indices
