docs/features/opensearch-dashboards/discover.md, before:

# Discover

## Summary

Discover is the data exploration application in OpenSearch Dashboards that allows users to interactively search, filter, and analyze data stored in OpenSearch indexes. It provides a powerful interface for ad-hoc data exploration with support for multiple query languages (DQL, Lucene, SQL, PPL), time-based filtering, field selection, document inspection, and AI-powered data summarization.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "OpenSearch Dashboards"
        subgraph "Discover Application"
            QE[Query Editor]
            QA[Query Assist]
            SP[Summary Panel]
            TF[Time Filter]
            FS[Field Selector]
            DT[Document Table]
            SQ[Saved Queries]
            DS[Dataset Selector]
        end
        subgraph "Data Services"
            QS[Query Service]
            SS[Search Service]
            IP[Index Patterns]
            FM[Filter Manager]
            QEC[Query Editor Extensions]
        end
        subgraph "Query Enhancements Plugin"
            SAP[Summary API]
            MLA[ML Agent Integration]
        end
    end
    subgraph "OpenSearch"
        IDX[Indexes]
        S3[S3 Data Sources]
        ML[ML Commons]
    end
    
    QE --> QS
    QA --> SP
    SP --> SAP
    SAP --> MLA
    MLA --> ML
    TF --> FM
    FS --> IP
    DT --> SS
    SQ --> QS
    DS --> IP
    QS --> IDX
    SS --> IDX
    IP --> IDX
    IP --> S3
    QEC --> QA
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    A[User enters query] --> B[Query Editor]
    B --> C{Query Language}
    C -->|DQL| D[DQL Parser]
    C -->|Lucene| E[Lucene Parser]
    C -->|SQL/PPL| F[SQL/PPL Engine]
    D --> G[Search Service]
    E --> G
    F --> G
    G --> H[OpenSearch]
    H --> I[Results]
    I --> J[Document Table]
    I --> K{Query Assist Enabled?}
    K -->|Yes| L[Summary Panel]
    L --> M[ML Agent]
    M --> N[LLM Summary]
    J --> O[Field Selector filters columns]
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| Query Editor | Input area for search queries with language selection |
| Query Assist | AI-powered query assistance with natural language input |
| Summary Panel | Displays LLM-generated summaries of query results |
| Time Filter | Controls time range for time-based indexes |
| Field Selector | Sidebar for selecting and filtering visible fields |
| Document Table | Displays search results with expandable documents |
| Saved Queries | Stores and loads frequently used queries |
| Dataset Selector | Selects data source with cache management |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `discover:searchOnPageLoad` | Run search when Discover loads | On |
| `discover:sort:defaultOrder` | Default sort order for time-based indexes | desc |
| `discover:sampleSize` | Number of documents to show | 500 |
| `query:enhancements:enabled` | Enable query enhancements (SQL/PPL support) | Off |
| `queryEnhancements.queryAssist.summary.enabled` | Enable AI data summary panel | false |

### Usage Example

```
# DQL Query Example
status:error AND response.code >= 500

# PPL Query Example (with query enhancements enabled)
source=logs | where status = 'error' | stats count() by host

# Time Filter
Last 15 minutes, Last 24 hours, Custom range

# Field Selection
Select fields from sidebar to customize table columns
```

### Data Summary Setup

To enable AI-powered data summaries:

```yaml
# opensearch_dashboards.yml
queryEnhancements.queryAssist.summary.enabled: true
```

Requires ML agent configuration:
1. Create a data summary agent with LLM connector
2. Register the agent as root agent for `os_data2summary`
3. Use PPL queries in Discover to see generated summaries

## Limitations

- Data summary requires ML agent configuration with LLM connector
- Summary feature only works with PPL queries when query assist is enabled
- S3 field support requires query enhancements to be enabled
- Cache refresh clears all dataset caches, not individual ones

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v3.2.0 | [#10345](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/10345) | Fix empty page when no index patterns exist |
| v3.2.0 | [#10315](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/10315) | Add cypress tests for discover visualization |
| v2.18.0 | [#8186](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8186) | Add data summary panel in discover |
| v2.18.0 | [#8214](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8214) | Add cache time and refresh button to dataset selector |
| v2.18.0 | [#8651](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8651) | Update the appearance of Discover |
| v2.18.0 | [#8352](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8352) | Add discover summary error info and button click logic |
| v2.18.0 | [#8060](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8060) | Fix row rendering in Discover infinite scroll |
| v2.18.0 | [#8082](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8082) | Fix infinite loop cause discover hang |
| v2.18.0 | [#8609](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8609) | Add support for S3 fields in Discover |
| v2.18.0 | [#8659](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8659) | Fix UI stuck on searching after deleting index pattern |
| v2.18.0 | [#8755](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8755) | Fix time field wrapping overlap on language change |
| v2.18.0 | [#8707](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8707) | Ensure saved query loaded properly from asset |

## References

- [Analyzing data in Discover](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.18/dashboards/discover/index-discover/): Official documentation
- [Data Summary Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.18/dashboards/dashboards-assistant/data-summary/): AI summary feature docs
- [Issue #8177](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/issues/8177): Feature request for LLM data summary
- [Issue #7626](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/issues/7626): Discover hang bug report
- [Issue #8612](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/issues/8612): Bug report for deleted index pattern issue

## Change History

- **v3.2.0** (2025-08-05): Fixed empty page issue when no index patterns exist, added Cypress tests for discover visualization
- **v2.18.0** (2024-11-05): Added AI-powered data summary panel, updated visual appearance, cache management in dataset selector, and 14 bug fixes for stability and usability

Commit message:

docs: add Discover Summary log pattern support report for v3.4.0

docs/features/opensearch-dashboards/discover.md, after:

# Discover

## Summary

Discover is the data exploration application in OpenSearch Dashboards that allows users to interactively search, filter, and analyze data stored in OpenSearch indexes. It provides a powerful interface for ad-hoc data exploration with support for multiple query languages (DQL, Lucene, SQL, PPL), time-based filtering, field selection, document inspection, and AI-powered data summarization.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "OpenSearch Dashboards"
        subgraph "Discover Application"
            QE[Query Editor]
            QA[Query Assist]
            SP[Summary Panel]
            TF[Time Filter]
            FS[Field Selector]
            DT[Document Table]
            SQ[Saved Queries]
            DS[Dataset Selector]
        end
        subgraph "Data Services"
            QS[Query Service]
            SS[Search Service]
            IP[Index Patterns]
            FM[Filter Manager]
            QEC[Query Editor Extensions]
        end
        subgraph "Query Enhancements Plugin"
            SAP[Summary API]
            MLA[ML Agent Integration]
        end
    end
    subgraph "OpenSearch"
        IDX[Indexes]
        S3[S3 Data Sources]
        ML[ML Commons]
    end
    
    QE --> QS
    QA --> SP
    SP --> SAP
    SAP --> MLA
    MLA --> ML
    TF --> FM
    FS --> IP
    DT --> SS
    SQ --> QS
    DS --> IP
    QS --> IDX
    SS --> IDX
    IP --> IDX
    IP --> S3
    QEC --> QA
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    A[User enters query] --> B[Query Editor]
    B --> C{Query Language}
    C -->|DQL| D[DQL Parser]
    C -->|Lucene| E[Lucene Parser]
    C -->|SQL/PPL| F[SQL/PPL Engine]
    D --> G[Search Service]
    E --> G
    F --> G
    G --> H[OpenSearch]
    H --> I[Results]
    I --> J[Document Table]
    I --> K{Query Assist Enabled?}
    K -->|Yes| L[Summary Panel]
    L --> M[ML Agent]
    M --> N[LLM Summary]
    J --> O[Field Selector filters columns]
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| Query Editor | Input area for search queries with language selection |
| Query Assist | AI-powered query assistance with natural language input |
| Summary Panel | Displays LLM-generated summaries of query results |
| Time Filter | Controls time range for time-based indexes |
| Field Selector | Sidebar for selecting and filtering visible fields |
| Document Table | Displays search results with expandable documents |
| Saved Queries | Stores and loads frequently used queries |
| Dataset Selector | Selects data source with cache management |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `discover:searchOnPageLoad` | Run search when Discover loads | On |
| `discover:sort:defaultOrder` | Default sort order for time-based indexes | desc |
| `discover:sampleSize` | Number of documents to show | 500 |
| `query:enhancements:enabled` | Enable query enhancements (SQL/PPL support) | Off |
| `queryEnhancements.queryAssist.summary.enabled` | Enable AI data summary panel | false |

### Usage Example

```
# DQL Query Example
status:error AND response.code >= 500

# PPL Query Example (with query enhancements enabled)
source=logs | where status = 'error' | stats count() by host

# Time Filter
Last 15 minutes, Last 24 hours, Custom range

# Field Selection
Select fields from sidebar to customize table columns
```

### Data Summary Setup

To enable AI-powered data summaries:

```yaml
# opensearch_dashboards.yml
queryEnhancements.queryAssist.summary.enabled: true
```

Requires ML agent configuration:
1. Create a data summary agent with LLM connector
2. Register the agent as root agent for `os_data2summary`
3. Use PPL queries in Discover to see generated summaries

## Limitations

- Data summary requires ML agent configuration with LLM connector
- Summary feature only works with PPL queries when query assist is enabled
- S3 field support requires query enhancements to be enabled
- Cache refresh clears all dataset caches, not individual ones

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v3.4.0 | [#550](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/550) | Support log pattern in discover summary |
| v3.4.0 | [#9693](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/9693) | Support log pattern agent in discover summary |
| v3.2.0 | [#10345](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/10345) | Fix empty page when no index patterns exist |
| v3.2.0 | [#10315](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/10315) | Add cypress tests for discover visualization |
| v2.18.0 | [#8186](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8186) | Add data summary panel in discover |
| v2.18.0 | [#8214](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8214) | Add cache time and refresh button to dataset selector |
| v2.18.0 | [#8651](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8651) | Update the appearance of Discover |
| v2.18.0 | [#8352](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8352) | Add discover summary error info and button click logic |
| v2.18.0 | [#8060](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8060) | Fix row rendering in Discover infinite scroll |
| v2.18.0 | [#8082](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8082) | Fix infinite loop cause discover hang |
| v2.18.0 | [#8609](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8609) | Add support for S3 fields in Discover |
| v2.18.0 | [#8659](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8659) | Fix UI stuck on searching after deleting index pattern |
| v2.18.0 | [#8755](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8755) | Fix time field wrapping overlap on language change |
| v2.18.0 | [#8707](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/8707) | Ensure saved query loaded properly from asset |

## References

- [Analyzing data in Discover](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.18/dashboards/discover/index-discover/): Official documentation
- [Data Summary Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.18/dashboards/dashboards-assistant/data-summary/): AI summary feature docs
- [Issue #8177](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/issues/8177): Feature request for LLM data summary
- [Issue #7626](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/issues/7626): Discover hang bug report
- [Issue #8612](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/issues/8612): Bug report for deleted index pattern issue

## Change History

- **v3.4.0** (2025-11-06): Added log pattern detection for Discover Summary - automatically uses specialized `os_data2summary_with_log_pattern` agent for log indexes
- **v3.2.0** (2025-08-05): Fixed empty page issue when no index patterns exist, added Cypress tests for discover visualization
- **v2.18.0** (2024-11-05): Added AI-powered data summary panel, updated visual appearance, cache management in dataset selector, and 14 bug fixes for stability and usability
