docs/features/dashboards-query-workbench/query-workbench.md, before:

# Query Workbench

## Summary

Query Workbench is an OpenSearch Dashboards plugin that enables users to query OpenSearch data using SQL or PPL (Piped Processing Language). It provides an interactive interface for writing, executing, and analyzing queries with features like syntax highlighting, query translation, and result visualization.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "OpenSearch Dashboards"
        QW[Query Workbench Plugin]
        subgraph "UI Components"
            Main[Main Page]
            SQL[SQL Page]
            PPL[PPL Page]
            Results[Query Results]
            Accel[Acceleration Tools]
        end
    end
    
    subgraph "OpenSearch"
        SQLPlugin[SQL Plugin]
        PPLEngine[PPL Engine]
        Indices[(Indices)]
    end
    
    subgraph "External Data Sources"
        S3[Amazon S3]
        Spark[Apache Spark]
    end
    
    QW --> Main
    Main --> SQL
    Main --> PPL
    SQL --> Results
    PPL --> Results
    Main --> Accel
    
    SQL --> SQLPlugin
    PPL --> PPLEngine
    SQLPlugin --> Indices
    PPLEngine --> Indices
    Accel --> Spark
    Spark --> S3
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    User[User] --> |Write Query| Editor[Query Editor]
    Editor --> |SQL/PPL| Parser[Query Parser]
    Parser --> |Validate| Validator[Query Validator]
    Validator --> |Execute| Engine[SQL/PPL Engine]
    Engine --> |Fetch| Data[(OpenSearch Data)]
    Data --> |Results| Formatter[Result Formatter]
    Formatter --> |Display| Table[Results Table]
    Table --> |Export| Export[CSV/JSON Export]
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| SQL Editor | Monaco-based editor for SQL queries with syntax highlighting |
| PPL Editor | Editor for Piped Processing Language queries |
| Query Results | Tabular display of query results with pagination |
| Data Source Selector | Dropdown for selecting OpenSearch or external data sources |
| Acceleration Tools | UI for creating covering indexes and materialized views |
| Query Translation | Explain feature showing query DSL translation |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `opensearch_sql.enabled` | Enable SQL plugin | `true` |
| `opensearch_sql.ppl.enabled` | Enable PPL support | `true` |
| `opensearch_sql.query.size_limit` | Maximum result size | `10000` |

### Usage Example

SQL Query:
```sql
SELECT customer_name, order_date, total_amount
FROM orders
WHERE order_date > '2024-01-01'
ORDER BY total_amount DESC
LIMIT 100
```

PPL Query:
```
source=orders
| where order_date > '2024-01-01'
| sort - total_amount
| head 100
| fields customer_name, order_date, total_amount
```

## Limitations

- Complex nested aggregations may have limited support in SQL
- PPL syntax differs from standard SQL and requires learning
- External data source queries require additional Spark configuration
- Large result sets may impact browser performance

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v2.17.0 | [#370](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-query-workbench/pull/370) | Use smaller and compressed variants of buttons and form components |

## References

- [Query Workbench Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/dashboards/query-workbench/)
- [SQL Plugin Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/search-plugins/sql/index/)
- [PPL Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/search-plugins/sql/ppl/index/)
- [Scheduled Query Acceleration](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/dashboards/management/scheduled-query-acceleration/)

## Change History

- **v2.17.0** (2024-09-17): UI improvements with smaller and compressed button/form variants for better consistency

Commit message:

docs: add Query Workbench Bugfixes report for v2.18.0 (#799)

docs/features/dashboards-query-workbench/query-workbench.md, after:

# Query Workbench

## Summary

Query Workbench is an OpenSearch Dashboards plugin that enables users to query OpenSearch data using SQL or PPL (Piped Processing Language). It provides an interactive interface for writing, executing, and analyzing queries with features like syntax highlighting, query translation, and result visualization.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "OpenSearch Dashboards"
        QW[Query Workbench Plugin]
        subgraph "UI Components"
            Main[Main Page]
            SQL[SQL Page]
            PPL[PPL Page]
            Results[Query Results]
            Accel[Acceleration Tools]
        end
    end
    
    subgraph "OpenSearch"
        SQLPlugin[SQL Plugin]
        PPLEngine[PPL Engine]
        Indices[(Indices)]
    end
    
    subgraph "External Data Sources"
        S3[Amazon S3]
        Spark[Apache Spark]
    end
    
    QW --> Main
    Main --> SQL
    Main --> PPL
    SQL --> Results
    PPL --> Results
    Main --> Accel
    
    SQL --> SQLPlugin
    PPL --> PPLEngine
    SQLPlugin --> Indices
    PPLEngine --> Indices
    Accel --> Spark
    Spark --> S3
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    User[User] --> |Write Query| Editor[Query Editor]
    Editor --> |SQL/PPL| Parser[Query Parser]
    Parser --> |Validate| Validator[Query Validator]
    Validator --> |Execute| Engine[SQL/PPL Engine]
    Engine --> |Fetch| Data[(OpenSearch Data)]
    Data --> |Results| Formatter[Result Formatter]
    Formatter --> |Display| Table[Results Table]
    Table --> |Export| Export[CSV/JSON Export]
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| SQL Editor | Monaco-based editor for SQL queries with syntax highlighting |
| PPL Editor | Editor for Piped Processing Language queries |
| Query Results | Tabular display of query results with pagination |
| Data Source Selector | Dropdown for selecting OpenSearch or external data sources |
| Acceleration Tools | UI for creating covering indexes and materialized views |
| Query Translation | Explain feature showing query DSL translation |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `opensearch_sql.enabled` | Enable SQL plugin | `true` |
| `opensearch_sql.ppl.enabled` | Enable PPL support | `true` |
| `opensearch_sql.query.size_limit` | Maximum result size | `10000` |

### Usage Example

SQL Query:
```sql
SELECT customer_name, order_date, total_amount
FROM orders
WHERE order_date > '2024-01-01'
ORDER BY total_amount DESC
LIMIT 100
```

PPL Query:
```
source=orders
| where order_date > '2024-01-01'
| sort - total_amount
| head 100
| fields customer_name, order_date, total_amount
```

## Limitations

- Complex nested aggregations may have limited support in SQL
- PPL syntax differs from standard SQL and requires learning
- External data source queries require additional Spark configuration
- Large result sets may impact browser performance

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v2.18.0 | [#401](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-query-workbench/pull/401) | Fix workbench routes to support modal mounting |
| v2.18.0 | [#408](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-query-workbench/pull/408) | Added error handling for API calls |
| v2.17.0 | [#370](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-query-workbench/pull/370) | Use smaller and compressed variants of buttons and form components |

## References

- [Query Workbench Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/dashboards/query-workbench/)
- [SQL Plugin Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/search-plugins/sql/index/)
- [PPL Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/search-plugins/sql/ppl/index/)
- [Scheduled Query Acceleration](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/dashboards/management/scheduled-query-acceleration/)

## Change History

- **v2.18.0** (2024-11-12): Bug fixes for modal mounting support and MDS error handling
- **v2.17.0** (2024-09-17): UI improvements with smaller and compressed button/form variants for better consistency
