docs/features/flow-framework/flow-framework.md, before:

---
tags:
  - flow-framework
---
# Flow Framework

## Summary

Flow Framework is an OpenSearch plugin that enables builders to automate the configuration of AI and ML workflows. It provides a declarative approach to creating, provisioning, and managing complex workflows that integrate with ML Commons, including connectors, models, agents, and tools. The plugin supports both synchronous and asynchronous provisioning with tenant-aware throttling for multi-tenant environments.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph "Flow Framework Plugin"
        API[REST API]
        WF[Workflow Engine]
        PROV[Provisioning Service]
        REPROV[Reprovision Service]
        DEPROV[Deprovision Service]
        STEPS[Workflow Steps]
        
        API --> WF
        WF --> PROV
        WF --> REPROV
        WF --> DEPROV
        PROV --> STEPS
        REPROV --> STEPS
    end
    
    subgraph "Workflow Steps"
        CONN[Create Connector]
        MODEL[Register Model]
        TOOL[Create Tool]
        AGENT[Register Agent]
        INDEX[Create Index]
    end
    
    subgraph "ML Commons"
        MLC[ML Commons Plugin]
    end
    
    subgraph "Storage"
        SYS[System Index]
        REMOTE[Remote Storage]
    end
    
    STEPS --> CONN
    STEPS --> MODEL
    STEPS --> TOOL
    STEPS --> AGENT
    STEPS --> INDEX
    
    CONN --> MLC
    MODEL --> MLC
    TOOL --> MLC
    AGENT --> MLC
    
    WF --> SYS
    WF --> REMOTE
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant API as REST API
    participant Engine as Workflow Engine
    participant Prov as Provisioning
    participant Steps as Workflow Steps
    participant ML as ML Commons
    
    User->>API: Create Workflow
    API->>Engine: Parse Template
    Engine->>API: Workflow ID
    
    User->>API: Provision Workflow
    API->>Prov: Start Provisioning
    
    loop For Each Step
        Prov->>Steps: Execute Step
        Steps->>ML: Create Resource
        ML-->>Steps: Resource ID
        Steps-->>Prov: Step Complete
    end
    
    Prov-->>API: Provisioning Complete
    API-->>User: Workflow State
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| Workflow Engine | Parses and validates workflow templates |
| Provisioning Service | Executes workflow steps to create resources |
| Reprovision Service | Updates existing workflows with new configurations |
| Deprovision Service | Removes resources created by workflows |
| Workflow Steps | Individual actions (create_connector, register_model, etc.) |
| ToolStep | Creates ML tools with support for attributes field |
| Config Parser | Handles workflow configuration with tenant awareness |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `plugins.flow_framework.enabled` | Enable/disable Flow Framework API | `false` |
| `plugins.flow_framework.max_workflows` | Maximum number of workflows | `1000` |
| `plugins.flow_framework.max_workflow_steps` | Maximum steps per workflow | `50` |
| `plugins.flow_framework.max_tenant_provision` | Max concurrent provisions per tenant | Configurable |
| `plugins.flow_framework.max_tenant_reprovision` | Max concurrent reprovisions per tenant | Configurable |
| `plugins.flow_framework.max_tenant_deprovision` | Max concurrent deprovisions per tenant | Configurable |

### Usage Example

```yaml
# Example workflow template
name: semantic-search-workflow
description: Set up semantic search with embeddings
use_case: SEMANTIC_SEARCH
version:
  template: "1.0.0"
  compatibility: ["3.0.0"]

workflows:
  provision:
    nodes:
      - id: create_connector
        type: create_connector
        user_inputs:
          name: OpenAI Connector
          protocol: http
          parameters:
            endpoint: api.openai.com
            model: text-embedding-ada-002
          credential:
            openAI_key: "${OPENAI_API_KEY}"
          actions:
            - action_type: predict
              method: POST
              url: https://api.openai.com/v1/embeddings
              
      - id: register_model
        type: register_remote_model
        previous_node_inputs:
          create_connector: connector_id
        user_inputs:
          name: OpenAI Embedding Model
          function_name: remote
          
      - id: create_tool
        type: create_tool
        previous_node_inputs:
          register_model: model_id
        user_inputs:
          name: VectorDBTool
          type: VectorDBTool
          attributes:
            index: my-vector-index
            source_field: text
```

```bash
# Create and provision workflow
POST /_plugins/_flow_framework/workflow?provision=true
Content-Type: application/yaml
<workflow template>

# Synchronous provisioning with timeout
POST /_plugins/_flow_framework/workflow/<id>/_provision?wait_for_completion_timeout=60s

# Check workflow status
GET /_plugins/_flow_framework/workflow/<id>/_status

# Reprovision with changes
POST /_plugins/_flow_framework/workflow/<id>/_reprovision?wait_for_completion_timeout=30s

# Deprovision workflow
POST /_plugins/_flow_framework/workflow/<id>/_deprovision
```

## Limitations

- Maximum 50 steps per workflow by default
- Maximum 1000 workflows per cluster by default
- Per-tenant throttling requires tenant awareness to be enabled
- Remote storage backends may have additional latency
- Synchronous provisioning has timeout limits

## Change History

- **v3.4.0** (2025-11-12): Fixed incorrect output dimension default (768→384) in `semantic-search-with-local-model-defaults.json` template to match the actual output dimension of the `paraphrase-MiniLM-L3-v2` model
- **v3.3.0** (2025-10-07): Fixed tenant-aware integration test failures by pre-creating ML Commons indices; Added `createMLCommonsIndices()` helper method to test infrastructure
- **v3.2.0** (2025-08-06): Bug fixes for ApiSpecFetcher memory issues and exception handling; Improved error messages for workflow steps with Bad Request status; Updated RegisterLocalCustomModelStep for OpenSearch 3.1+ API compatibility with model_config nesting and space_type support; Fixed encryption key race condition during concurrent template creation; Fixed connector name substitution in default use case templates
- **v3.1.0** (2025-07-15): Bug fixes for RegisterAgentStep LLM field processing, exception type in WorkflowState error messages, and LLM spec parameter passing; Conditional DynamoDB client dependency inclusion via environment variable; New data summary with log pattern agent template for query assist
- **v3.0.0** (2025-05-06): OpenSearch 3.0 compatibility fixes, per-tenant provisioning throttling, REST status code corrections, config parser fix for tenant_id, synchronous provisioning action listener fix, reprovision timeout response fix, ToolStep attributes field, text-to-visualization templates
- **v2.19.0** (2025-02-18): Multi-tenancy support with remote metadata storage (DynamoDB, remote OpenSearch); Synchronous provisioning with `wait_for_completion_timeout` parameter for provision and reprovision APIs; Fixed RBAC access control when workflow template is deleted by reading user info from workflow state; Improved logging with Log4j ParameterizedMessage
- **v2.18.0** (2024-11-05): Added optional config field to tool step for static tool parameters; Incremental resource removal during deprovisioning for better reliability; Removed Painless scripts for workflow state updates with optimistic locking; Fixed template update location in ReprovisionWorkflowTransportAction
- **v2.17.0** (2024-10-01): Initial Reprovision API implementation supporting updates to search pipelines, ingest pipelines, and index settings


## References

### Documentation
- [Workflow Settings Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/automating-configurations/workflow-settings/)
- [Workflow Templates Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/automating-configurations/workflow-templates/)
- [Workflow Tutorial](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/automating-configurations/workflow-tutorial/)
- [Workflow APIs](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/automating-configurations/api/index/)
- [Workflow Template Security](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/automating-configurations/workflow-security/)
- [Register Agent API](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/ml-commons-plugin/api/agent-apis/register-agent/)
- [Flow Agents](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/agents/flow/)
- [Hugging Face paraphrase-MiniLM-L3-v2](https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/paraphrase-MiniLM-L3-v2): Model documentation for semantic search with local model template

### Pull Requests
| Version | PR | Description | Related Issue |
|---------|-----|-------------|---------------|
| v3.4.0 | [#1270](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1270) | Fix incorrect field map output dimensions in semantic search with local model template | [#1254](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1254) |
| v3.3.0 | [#1217](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1217) | Pre-create ML Commons indices for Tenant Aware tests | [#1216](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1216) |
| v3.2.0 | [#1185](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1185) | Fix ApiSpecFetcher Memory Issues and Exception Handling |   |
| v3.2.0 | [#1190](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1190) | Better handling of Workflow Steps with Bad Request status | [#1189](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1189) |
| v3.2.0 | [#1194](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1194) | Update RegisterLocalCustomModelStep for 3.1+ compatibility | [#1180](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1180) |
| v3.2.0 | [#1200](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1200) | Avoid race condition setting encryption key |   |
| v3.2.0 | [#1205](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1205) | Fixing connector name in default use case | [#1197](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1197) |
| v3.1.0 | [#1151](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1151) | Fixing llm field processing in RegisterAgentStep |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#1154](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1154) | Include exception type in WorkflowState error field even if no cause | [#1153](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1153) |
| v3.1.0 | [#1155](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1155) | Pass llm spec params to builder |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#1141](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1141) | Conditionally include ddb-client dependency only if env variable set |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#1137](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1137) | Add data summary with log pattern agent template |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#1026](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1026) | Fix breaking changes for 3.0.0 release | [#8110](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/8110) |
| v3.0.0 | [#1074](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1074) | Add per-tenant provisioning throttling |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#1083](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1083) | Change REST status codes for RBAC and provisioning |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#1096](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1096) | Fix Config parser does not handle tenant_id field | [#1095](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1095) |
| v3.0.0 | [#1098](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1098) | Complete action listener on failed synchronous workflow provisioning | [#1097](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1097) |
| v3.0.0 | [#1107](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1107) | Fix bug handleReprovision missing wait_for_completion_timeout response | [#1106](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1106) |
| v3.0.0 | [#1113](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1113) | Add new attributes field to ToolStep | [#1112](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1112) |
| v3.0.0 | [#936](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/936) | Add text to visualization agent template |   |
| v2.19.0 | [#980](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/980) | Implement multi-tenancy in Flow Framework |   |
| v2.19.0 | [#990](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/990) | Add synchronous execution option to workflow provisioning | [#967](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/967) |
| v2.19.0 | [#998](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/998) | Fix RBAC fetching from workflow state when template is not present | [#986](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/986) |
| v2.19.0 | [#943](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/943) | Replace String concatenation with Log4j ParameterizedMessage | [#905](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/905) |
| v2.18.0 | [#899](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/899) | Add optional config field to tool step | [#878](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/878) |
| v2.18.0 | [#898](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/898) | Incrementally remove resources from workflow state during deprovisioning | [#780](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/780) |
| v2.18.0 | [#918](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/918) | Fixed template update location and improved logger statements in ReprovisionWorkflowTransportAction | [#870](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/870) |
| v2.18.0 | [#894](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/894) | Update workflow state without using painless script | [#779](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/779) |
| v2.17.0 | [#804](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/804) | Adds reprovision API to support updating search pipelines, ingest pipelines, index settings | [#717](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/717) |

### Issues (Design / RFC)
- [Issue #1254](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1254): Incorrect field map output dimensions in semantic search with local model template
- [Issue #1216](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1216): Tenant Aware Integ Tests failing because indices aren't being created
- [Issue #1180](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1180): Migrate workflow custom model registration to 3.1
- [Issue #1189](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1189): Error message for CreateIndexStep when index exists is unhelpful
- [Issue #1197](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1197): create_connector issue with connector name validation in 3.1.0
- [Issue #1153](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1153): Workflow state error messages don't include FFE/WSE types
- [Issue #1095](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1095): Config parser tenant_id handling
- [Issue #1097](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1097): Action listener completion
- [Issue #1106](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1106): Reprovision timeout response
- [Issue #1112](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1112): ToolStep attributes field
- [Issue #967](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/967): Add option to provision synchronously
- [Issue #986](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/986): Can't get or delete workflow state without template if filtering by user
- [Issue #905](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/905): Replace String concatenation with Log4j ParameterizedMessage
- [Issue #878](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/878): ML-commons config field in MLToolSpec
- [Issue #780](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/780): Update WorkflowState resources during deprovisioning
- [Issue #691](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/691): Handle deprovision with workflow state update failure

Commit message:

docs: add Flow Framework Bugfixes report for v2.16.0 (#2470)

docs/features/flow-framework/flow-framework.md, after:

---
tags:
  - flow-framework
---
# Flow Framework

## Summary

Flow Framework is an OpenSearch plugin that enables builders to automate the configuration of AI and ML workflows. It provides a declarative approach to creating, provisioning, and managing complex workflows that integrate with ML Commons, including connectors, models, agents, and tools. The plugin supports both synchronous and asynchronous provisioning with tenant-aware throttling for multi-tenant environments.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph "Flow Framework Plugin"
        API[REST API]
        WF[Workflow Engine]
        PROV[Provisioning Service]
        REPROV[Reprovision Service]
        DEPROV[Deprovision Service]
        STEPS[Workflow Steps]
        
        API --> WF
        WF --> PROV
        WF --> REPROV
        WF --> DEPROV
        PROV --> STEPS
        REPROV --> STEPS
    end
    
    subgraph "Workflow Steps"
        CONN[Create Connector]
        MODEL[Register Model]
        TOOL[Create Tool]
        AGENT[Register Agent]
        INDEX[Create Index]
    end
    
    subgraph "ML Commons"
        MLC[ML Commons Plugin]
    end
    
    subgraph "Storage"
        SYS[System Index]
        REMOTE[Remote Storage]
    end
    
    STEPS --> CONN
    STEPS --> MODEL
    STEPS --> TOOL
    STEPS --> AGENT
    STEPS --> INDEX
    
    CONN --> MLC
    MODEL --> MLC
    TOOL --> MLC
    AGENT --> MLC
    
    WF --> SYS
    WF --> REMOTE
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant API as REST API
    participant Engine as Workflow Engine
    participant Prov as Provisioning
    participant Steps as Workflow Steps
    participant ML as ML Commons
    
    User->>API: Create Workflow
    API->>Engine: Parse Template
    Engine->>API: Workflow ID
    
    User->>API: Provision Workflow
    API->>Prov: Start Provisioning
    
    loop For Each Step
        Prov->>Steps: Execute Step
        Steps->>ML: Create Resource
        ML-->>Steps: Resource ID
        Steps-->>Prov: Step Complete
    end
    
    Prov-->>API: Provisioning Complete
    API-->>User: Workflow State
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| Workflow Engine | Parses and validates workflow templates |
| Provisioning Service | Executes workflow steps to create resources |
| Reprovision Service | Updates existing workflows with new configurations |
| Deprovision Service | Removes resources created by workflows |
| Workflow Steps | Individual actions (create_connector, register_model, etc.) |
| ToolStep | Creates ML tools with support for attributes field |
| Config Parser | Handles workflow configuration with tenant awareness |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `plugins.flow_framework.enabled` | Enable/disable Flow Framework API | `false` |
| `plugins.flow_framework.max_workflows` | Maximum number of workflows | `1000` |
| `plugins.flow_framework.max_workflow_steps` | Maximum steps per workflow | `50` |
| `plugins.flow_framework.max_tenant_provision` | Max concurrent provisions per tenant | Configurable |
| `plugins.flow_framework.max_tenant_reprovision` | Max concurrent reprovisions per tenant | Configurable |
| `plugins.flow_framework.max_tenant_deprovision` | Max concurrent deprovisions per tenant | Configurable |

### Usage Example

```yaml
# Example workflow template
name: semantic-search-workflow
description: Set up semantic search with embeddings
use_case: SEMANTIC_SEARCH
version:
  template: "1.0.0"
  compatibility: ["3.0.0"]

workflows:
  provision:
    nodes:
      - id: create_connector
        type: create_connector
        user_inputs:
          name: OpenAI Connector
          protocol: http
          parameters:
            endpoint: api.openai.com
            model: text-embedding-ada-002
          credential:
            openAI_key: "${OPENAI_API_KEY}"
          actions:
            - action_type: predict
              method: POST
              url: https://api.openai.com/v1/embeddings
              
      - id: register_model
        type: register_remote_model
        previous_node_inputs:
          create_connector: connector_id
        user_inputs:
          name: OpenAI Embedding Model
          function_name: remote
          
      - id: create_tool
        type: create_tool
        previous_node_inputs:
          register_model: model_id
        user_inputs:
          name: VectorDBTool
          type: VectorDBTool
          attributes:
            index: my-vector-index
            source_field: text
```

```bash
# Create and provision workflow
POST /_plugins/_flow_framework/workflow?provision=true
Content-Type: application/yaml
<workflow template>

# Synchronous provisioning with timeout
POST /_plugins/_flow_framework/workflow/<id>/_provision?wait_for_completion_timeout=60s

# Check workflow status
GET /_plugins/_flow_framework/workflow/<id>/_status

# Reprovision with changes
POST /_plugins/_flow_framework/workflow/<id>/_reprovision?wait_for_completion_timeout=30s

# Deprovision workflow
POST /_plugins/_flow_framework/workflow/<id>/_deprovision
```

## Limitations

- Maximum 50 steps per workflow by default
- Maximum 1000 workflows per cluster by default
- Per-tenant throttling requires tenant awareness to be enabled
- Remote storage backends may have additional latency
- Synchronous provisioning has timeout limits

## Change History

- **v3.4.0** (2025-11-12): Fixed incorrect output dimension default (768→384) in `semantic-search-with-local-model-defaults.json` template to match the actual output dimension of the `paraphrase-MiniLM-L3-v2` model
- **v3.3.0** (2025-10-07): Fixed tenant-aware integration test failures by pre-creating ML Commons indices; Added `createMLCommonsIndices()` helper method to test infrastructure
- **v3.2.0** (2025-08-06): Bug fixes for ApiSpecFetcher memory issues and exception handling; Improved error messages for workflow steps with Bad Request status; Updated RegisterLocalCustomModelStep for OpenSearch 3.1+ API compatibility with model_config nesting and space_type support; Fixed encryption key race condition during concurrent template creation; Fixed connector name substitution in default use case templates
- **v3.1.0** (2025-07-15): Bug fixes for RegisterAgentStep LLM field processing, exception type in WorkflowState error messages, and LLM spec parameter passing; Conditional DynamoDB client dependency inclusion via environment variable; New data summary with log pattern agent template for query assist
- **v3.0.0** (2025-05-06): OpenSearch 3.0 compatibility fixes, per-tenant provisioning throttling, REST status code corrections, config parser fix for tenant_id, synchronous provisioning action listener fix, reprovision timeout response fix, ToolStep attributes field, text-to-visualization templates
- **v2.19.0** (2025-02-18): Multi-tenancy support with remote metadata storage (DynamoDB, remote OpenSearch); Synchronous provisioning with `wait_for_completion_timeout` parameter for provision and reprovision APIs; Fixed RBAC access control when workflow template is deleted by reading user info from workflow state; Improved logging with Log4j ParameterizedMessage
- **v2.18.0** (2024-11-05): Added optional config field to tool step for static tool parameters; Incremental resource removal during deprovisioning for better reliability; Removed Painless scripts for workflow state updates with optimistic locking; Fixed template update location in ReprovisionWorkflowTransportAction
- **v2.17.0** (2024-10-01): Initial Reprovision API implementation supporting updates to search pipelines, ingest pipelines, and index settings
- **v2.16.0** (2024-08-06): Bug fixes for deprovision error handling (NOT_FOUND exceptions treated as successful deletions for models/agents), system index mapping _doc wrapper, and FlowFrameworkException status code recognition by ExceptionsHelper


## References

### Documentation
- [Workflow Settings Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/automating-configurations/workflow-settings/)
- [Workflow Templates Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/automating-configurations/workflow-templates/)
- [Workflow Tutorial](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/automating-configurations/workflow-tutorial/)
- [Workflow APIs](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/automating-configurations/api/index/)
- [Workflow Template Security](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/automating-configurations/workflow-security/)
- [Register Agent API](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/ml-commons-plugin/api/agent-apis/register-agent/)
- [Flow Agents](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/agents/flow/)
- [Hugging Face paraphrase-MiniLM-L3-v2](https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/paraphrase-MiniLM-L3-v2): Model documentation for semantic search with local model template

### Pull Requests
| Version | PR | Description | Related Issue |
|---------|-----|-------------|---------------|
| v3.4.0 | [#1270](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1270) | Fix incorrect field map output dimensions in semantic search with local model template | [#1254](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1254) |
| v3.3.0 | [#1217](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1217) | Pre-create ML Commons indices for Tenant Aware tests | [#1216](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1216) |
| v3.2.0 | [#1185](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1185) | Fix ApiSpecFetcher Memory Issues and Exception Handling |   |
| v3.2.0 | [#1190](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1190) | Better handling of Workflow Steps with Bad Request status | [#1189](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1189) |
| v3.2.0 | [#1194](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1194) | Update RegisterLocalCustomModelStep for 3.1+ compatibility | [#1180](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1180) |
| v3.2.0 | [#1200](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1200) | Avoid race condition setting encryption key |   |
| v3.2.0 | [#1205](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1205) | Fixing connector name in default use case | [#1197](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1197) |
| v3.1.0 | [#1151](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1151) | Fixing llm field processing in RegisterAgentStep |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#1154](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1154) | Include exception type in WorkflowState error field even if no cause | [#1153](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1153) |
| v3.1.0 | [#1155](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1155) | Pass llm spec params to builder |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#1141](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1141) | Conditionally include ddb-client dependency only if env variable set |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#1137](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1137) | Add data summary with log pattern agent template |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#1026](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1026) | Fix breaking changes for 3.0.0 release | [#8110](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/8110) |
| v3.0.0 | [#1074](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1074) | Add per-tenant provisioning throttling |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#1083](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1083) | Change REST status codes for RBAC and provisioning |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#1096](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1096) | Fix Config parser does not handle tenant_id field | [#1095](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1095) |
| v3.0.0 | [#1098](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1098) | Complete action listener on failed synchronous workflow provisioning | [#1097](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1097) |
| v3.0.0 | [#1107](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1107) | Fix bug handleReprovision missing wait_for_completion_timeout response | [#1106](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1106) |
| v3.0.0 | [#1113](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/1113) | Add new attributes field to ToolStep | [#1112](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1112) |
| v3.0.0 | [#936](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/936) | Add text to visualization agent template |   |
| v2.19.0 | [#980](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/980) | Implement multi-tenancy in Flow Framework |   |
| v2.19.0 | [#990](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/990) | Add synchronous execution option to workflow provisioning | [#967](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/967) |
| v2.19.0 | [#998](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/998) | Fix RBAC fetching from workflow state when template is not present | [#986](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/986) |
| v2.19.0 | [#943](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/943) | Replace String concatenation with Log4j ParameterizedMessage | [#905](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/905) |
| v2.18.0 | [#899](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/899) | Add optional config field to tool step | [#878](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/878) |
| v2.18.0 | [#898](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/898) | Incrementally remove resources from workflow state during deprovisioning | [#780](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/780) |
| v2.18.0 | [#918](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/918) | Fixed template update location and improved logger statements in ReprovisionWorkflowTransportAction | [#870](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/870) |
| v2.18.0 | [#894](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/894) | Update workflow state without using painless script | [#779](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/779) |
| v2.17.0 | [#804](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/804) | Adds reprovision API to support updating search pipelines, ingest pipelines, index settings | [#717](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/717) |
| v2.16.0 | [#805](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/805) | Handle Not Found deprovision exceptions as successful deletions | [#803](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/803) |
| v2.16.0 | [#809](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/809) | Wrap CreateIndexRequest mappings in _doc key as required | [#798](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/798) |
| v2.16.0 | [#811](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/pull/811) | Have FlowFrameworkException status recognized by ExceptionsHelper | [#810](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/810) |

### Issues (Design / RFC)
- [Issue #1254](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1254): Incorrect field map output dimensions in semantic search with local model template
- [Issue #1216](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1216): Tenant Aware Integ Tests failing because indices aren't being created
- [Issue #1180](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1180): Migrate workflow custom model registration to 3.1
- [Issue #1189](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1189): Error message for CreateIndexStep when index exists is unhelpful
- [Issue #1197](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1197): create_connector issue with connector name validation in 3.1.0
- [Issue #1153](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1153): Workflow state error messages don't include FFE/WSE types
- [Issue #1095](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1095): Config parser tenant_id handling
- [Issue #1097](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1097): Action listener completion
- [Issue #1106](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1106): Reprovision timeout response
- [Issue #1112](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/1112): ToolStep attributes field
- [Issue #967](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/967): Add option to provision synchronously
- [Issue #986](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/986): Can't get or delete workflow state without template if filtering by user
- [Issue #905](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/905): Replace String concatenation with Log4j ParameterizedMessage
- [Issue #878](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/878): ML-commons config field in MLToolSpec
- [Issue #810](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/810): Deprovision workflow returns 500 error when workflow ID not found
- [Issue #803](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/803): DeleteModelStep and DeleteAgentStep don't handle NOT_FOUND exceptions
- [Issue #798](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/798): System index mapping does not use required _doc wrapper
- [Issue #780](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/780): Update WorkflowState resources during deprovisioning
- [Issue #691](https://github.com/opensearch-project/flow-framework/issues/691): Handle deprovision with workflow state update failure
