docs/features/ml-commons/ml-commons-agent-framework.md, before:

# ML Commons Agent Framework

## Summary

The ML Commons Agent Framework enables building AI-powered agents within OpenSearch that can orchestrate tools, interact with LLMs, and maintain conversational memory. Agents can perform complex tasks by combining multiple tools, executing plans, and reflecting on results to provide intelligent responses.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Agent Framework"
        subgraph "Agent APIs"
            REG[Register Agent]
            UPD[Update Agent]
            EXEC[Execute Agent]
            GET[Get Agent]
            SEARCH[Search Agent]
            DEL[Delete Agent]
        end
        
        subgraph "MCP APIs"
            MCP_REG[Register MCP Tools]
            MCP_UPD[Update MCP Tools]
            MCP_LIST[List MCP Tools]
        end
        
        subgraph "Agent Types"
            FLOW[Flow Agent]
            CONV_FLOW[Conversational Flow Agent]
            CONV[Conversational Agent]
            PER[Plan-Execute-Reflect Agent]
        end
        
        subgraph "LLM Integration"
            LLM[LLM Connector]
            FC[Function Calling]
            SSE[SSE Endpoint]
            LLMI[LLM Interface]
        end
        
        subgraph "Memory"
            CONV_MEM[Conversation Memory]
            EXEC_MEM[Executor Memory]
        end
        
        subgraph "Tools"
            BUILTIN[Built-in Tools]
            MCP_TOOLS[MCP Tools]
            CUSTOM[Custom Tools]
        end
    end
    
    subgraph "External Services"
        BEDROCK[Amazon Bedrock]
        OPENAI[OpenAI]
        OTHER[Other LLM Services]
    end
    
    REG --> FLOW
    REG --> CONV_FLOW
    REG --> CONV
    REG --> PER
    UPD --> FLOW
    UPD --> CONV
    
    EXEC --> LLM
    LLM --> FC
    FC --> LLMI
    LLMI --> SSE
    
    LLM --> BEDROCK
    LLM --> OPENAI
    LLM --> OTHER
    
    EXEC --> CONV_MEM
    PER --> EXEC_MEM
    
    EXEC --> BUILTIN
    EXEC --> MCP_TOOLS
    EXEC --> CUSTOM
    
    MCP_REG --> MCP_TOOLS
    MCP_UPD --> MCP_TOOLS
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    USER[User Query] --> EXEC[Execute Agent]
    EXEC --> PLAN[Create Plan]
    PLAN --> TOOL_SELECT[Select Tools]
    TOOL_SELECT --> TOOL_EXEC[Execute Tools]
    TOOL_EXEC --> LLM[LLM Processing]
    LLM --> REFLECT[Reflect on Results]
    REFLECT --> |Need More| TOOL_SELECT
    REFLECT --> |Complete| RESPONSE[Generate Response]
    RESPONSE --> MEMORY[Store in Memory]
    MEMORY --> USER
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| Agent Registry | Stores agent configurations in system index |
| Agent Executor | Orchestrates agent execution with tool selection and LLM interaction |
| Memory Manager | Manages conversation and executor memory for context retention |
| Tool Registry | Manages built-in, MCP, and custom tools |
| LLM Connector | Connects to external LLM services (Bedrock, OpenAI, etc.) |
| Function Calling | Native function/tool calling support for compatible LLMs |
| MCP Server | Model Context Protocol server for tool integration |
| Metrics Collector | Collects adoption and operational metrics |

### Agent Types

| Type | Description | Use Case |
|------|-------------|----------|
| Flow Agent | Sequential tool execution | Simple workflows |
| Conversational Flow Agent | Flow agent with memory | Multi-turn workflows |
| Conversational Agent | LLM-driven with memory | General chat assistants |
| Plan-Execute-Reflect Agent | Planning, execution, and reflection loop | Complex reasoning tasks |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `plugins.ml_commons.agent_framework.enabled` | Enable agent framework | `true` |
| `plugins.ml_commons.metrics.enabled` | Enable metrics collection | `true` |
| `plugins.ml_commons.memory.feature_enabled` | Enable conversation memory | `true` |

### APIs

**Register Agent**
```
POST /_plugins/_ml/agents/_register
```

**Update Agent** (v3.1.0+)
```
PUT /_plugins/_ml/agents/{agent_id}
```

**Execute Agent**
```
POST /_plugins/_ml/agents/{agent_id}/_execute
```

**MCP Tools Management** (v3.1.0+)
```
POST /_plugins/_ml/mcp/tools/_update
GET /_plugins/_ml/mcp/tools/_list
```

### Usage Example

**Register a conversational agent with function calling:**
```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/agents/_register
{
  "name": "Search Assistant",
  "type": "conversational",
  "description": "An assistant that helps search OpenSearch indices",
  "llm": {
    "model_id": "bedrock_claude_model_id",
    "parameters": {
      "prompt": "${parameters.question}"
    }
  },
  "memory": {
    "type": "conversation_index"
  },
  "parameters": {
    "_llm_interface": "bedrock/converse/claude"
  },
  "tools": [
    {
      "type": "ListIndexTool",
      "description": "List available indices"
    },
    {
      "type": "SearchIndexTool",
      "description": "Search documents in an index"
    },
    {
      "type": "IndexMappingTool",
      "description": "Get index mappings"
    }
  ]
}
```

**Execute the agent:**
```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/agents/{agent_id}/_execute
{
  "parameters": {
    "question": "What indices do I have and what are their mappings?"
  }
}
```

**Update agent configuration:**
```json
PUT /_plugins/_ml/agents/{agent_id}
{
  "name": "Updated Search Assistant",
  "description": "Updated description",
  "tools": [
    { "type": "ListIndexTool" },
    { "type": "SearchIndexTool" },
    { "type": "IndexMappingTool" },
    { "type": "PPLTool" }
  ]
}
```

## Limitations

- Function calling requires compatible LLM interfaces (Bedrock/Claude, DeepSeek, OpenAI)
- Simultaneous tool use with handle/supply not yet supported
- Circuit breaker bypass for agents may impact cluster stability under heavy load
- Agent execution timeout depends on underlying LLM response time
- Execute Tool API is experimental (v3.2.0+)
- Memory container features require explicit feature flag enablement (v3.2.0+)
- AI-oriented memory operations depend on LLM model quality for fact extraction (v3.2.0+)

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v3.2.0 | [#4035](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4035) | Add Execute Tool API |
| v3.2.0 | [#4050](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4050) | Implement create and add memory container API |
| v3.2.0 | [#4055](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4055) | Enable AI-Oriented memory operations |
| v3.2.0 | [#4006](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4006) | Initiate QueryPlanningTool |
| v3.2.0 | [#4027](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4027) | Delete memory container API |
| v3.2.0 | [#4069](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4069) | GET memory API |
| v3.2.0 | [#4053](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4053) | Support output filter and improve SearchIndexTool |
| v3.2.0 | [#4008](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4008) | Add date/time injection for agents |
| v3.2.0 | [#4031](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4031) | Ensure chat agent returns response at max iterations |
| v3.1.0 | [#3820](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3820) | Expose Update Agent API |
| v3.1.0 | [#3874](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3874) | Support persisting MCP tools in system index |
| v3.1.0 | [#3888](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3888) | Use function calling for existing LLM interfaces |
| v3.1.0 | [#3891](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3891) | Add custom SSE endpoint for MCP Client |
| v3.1.0 | [#3884](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3884) | PlanExecuteReflect: Return memory early to track progress |
| v3.1.0 | [#3810](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3810) | Support customized message endpoint |
| v3.1.0 | [#3845](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3845) | Add error handling for plan&execute agent |
| v3.1.0 | [#3661](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3661) | Metrics framework integration with ml-commons |
| v3.1.0 | [#3862](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3862) | Fix connector private IP validation when executing agent |
| v3.1.0 | [#3814](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3814) | Exclude circuit breaker for Agent |
| v3.1.0 | [#3822](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3822) | Fix Python client MCP server connection |

## References

- [Agent APIs Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/ml-commons-plugin/api/agent-apis/index/)
- [Plan-Execute-Reflect Agents](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/agents/plan-execute-reflect/)
- [ML Commons Cluster Settings](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/ml-commons-plugin/cluster-settings/)
- [Issue #3748](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/issues/3748): Update Agent API feature request
- [Issue #2172](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/issues/2172): Original Update Agent API request
- [Issue #3841](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/issues/3841): MCP tools persistence
- [Issue #3847](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/issues/3847): Function calling for LLM interfaces
- [Issue #3635](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/issues/3635): Metrics framework integration

## Change History

- **v3.2.0** (2025-09-16): Execute Tool API, AI-oriented memory container system (create, add, search, update, delete, get), QueryPlanningTool for agentic search, date/time injection for agents, message history limit for PER Agent, output filter support, SearchIndexTool improvements, feature flags for agentic search/memory, multiple bug fixes (class cast exception, connector URL exposure, async status, max iterations handling)
- **v3.1.0** (2025-07-15): Update Agent API, MCP tools persistence, function calling for LLM interfaces, custom SSE endpoint, metrics framework integration, PlanExecuteReflect memory tracking, error handling improvements, multiple bug fixes (private IP validation, circuit breaker bypass, Python MCP client)
- **v3.0.0** (2025-05-13): Plan-Execute-Reflect agent type, MCP server integration
- **v2.13.0** (2024-03-26): Initial agent framework with flow and conversational agents

Commit message:

docs: add move-common-string report for v3.3.0 (#1536)

docs/features/ml-commons/ml-commons-agent-framework.md, after:

# ML Commons Agent Framework

## Summary

The ML Commons Agent Framework enables building AI-powered agents within OpenSearch that can orchestrate tools, interact with LLMs, and maintain conversational memory. Agents can perform complex tasks by combining multiple tools, executing plans, and reflecting on results to provide intelligent responses.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Agent Framework"
        subgraph "Agent APIs"
            REG[Register Agent]
            UPD[Update Agent]
            EXEC[Execute Agent]
            GET[Get Agent]
            SEARCH[Search Agent]
            DEL[Delete Agent]
        end
        
        subgraph "MCP APIs"
            MCP_REG[Register MCP Tools]
            MCP_UPD[Update MCP Tools]
            MCP_LIST[List MCP Tools]
        end
        
        subgraph "Agent Types"
            FLOW[Flow Agent]
            CONV_FLOW[Conversational Flow Agent]
            CONV[Conversational Agent]
            PER[Plan-Execute-Reflect Agent]
        end
        
        subgraph "LLM Integration"
            LLM[LLM Connector]
            FC[Function Calling]
            SSE[SSE Endpoint]
            LLMI[LLM Interface]
        end
        
        subgraph "Memory"
            CONV_MEM[Conversation Memory]
            EXEC_MEM[Executor Memory]
        end
        
        subgraph "Tools"
            BUILTIN[Built-in Tools]
            MCP_TOOLS[MCP Tools]
            CUSTOM[Custom Tools]
        end
    end
    
    subgraph "External Services"
        BEDROCK[Amazon Bedrock]
        OPENAI[OpenAI]
        OTHER[Other LLM Services]
    end
    
    REG --> FLOW
    REG --> CONV_FLOW
    REG --> CONV
    REG --> PER
    UPD --> FLOW
    UPD --> CONV
    
    EXEC --> LLM
    LLM --> FC
    FC --> LLMI
    LLMI --> SSE
    
    LLM --> BEDROCK
    LLM --> OPENAI
    LLM --> OTHER
    
    EXEC --> CONV_MEM
    PER --> EXEC_MEM
    
    EXEC --> BUILTIN
    EXEC --> MCP_TOOLS
    EXEC --> CUSTOM
    
    MCP_REG --> MCP_TOOLS
    MCP_UPD --> MCP_TOOLS
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    USER[User Query] --> EXEC[Execute Agent]
    EXEC --> PLAN[Create Plan]
    PLAN --> TOOL_SELECT[Select Tools]
    TOOL_SELECT --> TOOL_EXEC[Execute Tools]
    TOOL_EXEC --> LLM[LLM Processing]
    LLM --> REFLECT[Reflect on Results]
    REFLECT --> |Need More| TOOL_SELECT
    REFLECT --> |Complete| RESPONSE[Generate Response]
    RESPONSE --> MEMORY[Store in Memory]
    MEMORY --> USER
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| Agent Registry | Stores agent configurations in system index |
| Agent Executor | Orchestrates agent execution with tool selection and LLM interaction |
| Memory Manager | Manages conversation and executor memory for context retention |
| Tool Registry | Manages built-in, MCP, and custom tools |
| LLM Connector | Connects to external LLM services (Bedrock, OpenAI, etc.) |
| Function Calling | Native function/tool calling support for compatible LLMs |
| MCP Server | Model Context Protocol server for tool integration |
| Metrics Collector | Collects adoption and operational metrics |

### Agent Types

| Type | Description | Use Case |
|------|-------------|----------|
| Flow Agent | Sequential tool execution | Simple workflows |
| Conversational Flow Agent | Flow agent with memory | Multi-turn workflows |
| Conversational Agent | LLM-driven with memory | General chat assistants |
| Plan-Execute-Reflect Agent | Planning, execution, and reflection loop | Complex reasoning tasks |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `plugins.ml_commons.agent_framework.enabled` | Enable agent framework | `true` |
| `plugins.ml_commons.metrics.enabled` | Enable metrics collection | `true` |
| `plugins.ml_commons.memory.feature_enabled` | Enable conversation memory | `true` |

### APIs

**Register Agent**
```
POST /_plugins/_ml/agents/_register
```

**Update Agent** (v3.1.0+)
```
PUT /_plugins/_ml/agents/{agent_id}
```

**Execute Agent**
```
POST /_plugins/_ml/agents/{agent_id}/_execute
```

**MCP Tools Management** (v3.1.0+)
```
POST /_plugins/_ml/mcp/tools/_update
GET /_plugins/_ml/mcp/tools/_list
```

### Usage Example

**Register a conversational agent with function calling:**
```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/agents/_register
{
  "name": "Search Assistant",
  "type": "conversational",
  "description": "An assistant that helps search OpenSearch indices",
  "llm": {
    "model_id": "bedrock_claude_model_id",
    "parameters": {
      "prompt": "${parameters.question}"
    }
  },
  "memory": {
    "type": "conversation_index"
  },
  "parameters": {
    "_llm_interface": "bedrock/converse/claude"
  },
  "tools": [
    {
      "type": "ListIndexTool",
      "description": "List available indices"
    },
    {
      "type": "SearchIndexTool",
      "description": "Search documents in an index"
    },
    {
      "type": "IndexMappingTool",
      "description": "Get index mappings"
    }
  ]
}
```

**Execute the agent:**
```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/agents/{agent_id}/_execute
{
  "parameters": {
    "question": "What indices do I have and what are their mappings?"
  }
}
```

**Update agent configuration:**
```json
PUT /_plugins/_ml/agents/{agent_id}
{
  "name": "Updated Search Assistant",
  "description": "Updated description",
  "tools": [
    { "type": "ListIndexTool" },
    { "type": "SearchIndexTool" },
    { "type": "IndexMappingTool" },
    { "type": "PPLTool" }
  ]
}
```

## Limitations

- Function calling requires compatible LLM interfaces (Bedrock/Claude, DeepSeek, OpenAI)
- Simultaneous tool use with handle/supply not yet supported
- Circuit breaker bypass for agents may impact cluster stability under heavy load
- Agent execution timeout depends on underlying LLM response time
- Execute Tool API is experimental (v3.2.0+)
- Memory container features require explicit feature flag enablement (v3.2.0+)
- AI-oriented memory operations depend on LLM model quality for fact extraction (v3.2.0+)

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v3.3.0 | [#4173](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4173) | Move common string to common package |
| v3.2.0 | [#4035](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4035) | Add Execute Tool API |
| v3.2.0 | [#4050](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4050) | Implement create and add memory container API |
| v3.2.0 | [#4055](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4055) | Enable AI-Oriented memory operations |
| v3.2.0 | [#4006](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4006) | Initiate QueryPlanningTool |
| v3.2.0 | [#4027](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4027) | Delete memory container API |
| v3.2.0 | [#4069](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4069) | GET memory API |
| v3.2.0 | [#4053](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4053) | Support output filter and improve SearchIndexTool |
| v3.2.0 | [#4008](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4008) | Add date/time injection for agents |
| v3.2.0 | [#4031](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/4031) | Ensure chat agent returns response at max iterations |
| v3.1.0 | [#3820](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3820) | Expose Update Agent API |
| v3.1.0 | [#3874](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3874) | Support persisting MCP tools in system index |
| v3.1.0 | [#3888](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3888) | Use function calling for existing LLM interfaces |
| v3.1.0 | [#3891](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3891) | Add custom SSE endpoint for MCP Client |
| v3.1.0 | [#3884](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3884) | PlanExecuteReflect: Return memory early to track progress |
| v3.1.0 | [#3810](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3810) | Support customized message endpoint |
| v3.1.0 | [#3845](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3845) | Add error handling for plan&execute agent |
| v3.1.0 | [#3661](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3661) | Metrics framework integration with ml-commons |
| v3.1.0 | [#3862](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3862) | Fix connector private IP validation when executing agent |
| v3.1.0 | [#3814](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3814) | Exclude circuit breaker for Agent |
| v3.1.0 | [#3822](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/pull/3822) | Fix Python client MCP server connection |

## References

- [Agent APIs Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/ml-commons-plugin/api/agent-apis/index/)
- [Plan-Execute-Reflect Agents](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/agents/plan-execute-reflect/)
- [ML Commons Cluster Settings](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/ml-commons-plugin/cluster-settings/)
- [Issue #3748](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/issues/3748): Update Agent API feature request
- [Issue #2172](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/issues/2172): Original Update Agent API request
- [Issue #3841](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/issues/3841): MCP tools persistence
- [Issue #3847](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/issues/3847): Function calling for LLM interfaces
- [Issue #3635](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/issues/3635): Metrics framework integration

## Change History

- **v3.3.0** (2026-01-14): Code refactoring - moved `NO_ESCAPE_PARAMS` constant from `AgentUtils` to `ToolUtils` in common package for skills plugin accessibility
- **v3.2.0** (2025-09-16): Execute Tool API, AI-oriented memory container system (create, add, search, update, delete, get), QueryPlanningTool for agentic search, date/time injection for agents, message history limit for PER Agent, output filter support, SearchIndexTool improvements, feature flags for agentic search/memory, multiple bug fixes (class cast exception, connector URL exposure, async status, max iterations handling)
- **v3.1.0** (2025-07-15): Update Agent API, MCP tools persistence, function calling for LLM interfaces, custom SSE endpoint, metrics framework integration, PlanExecuteReflect memory tracking, error handling improvements, multiple bug fixes (private IP validation, circuit breaker bypass, Python MCP client)
- **v3.0.0** (2025-05-13): Plan-Execute-Reflect agent type, MCP server integration
- **v2.13.0** (2024-03-26): Initial agent framework with flow and conversational agents
