docs/features/dashboards-assistant/dashboards-assistant-ai-assistant-chatbot.md, before:

---
tags:
  - dashboards-assistant
---
# AI Assistant / Chatbot

## Summary

The OpenSearch AI Assistant (Chatbot) is an AI-powered conversational interface integrated into OpenSearch Dashboards. It enables users to interact with their data through natural language, generate visualizations from text descriptions, receive alert insights, and get data summaries without requiring specialized query skills. The assistant leverages ML Commons agents and tools to provide intelligent responses.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "OpenSearch Dashboards"
        Entry[Entry Point Button]
        ChatUI[Chat Interface]
        T2V[Text-to-Visualization]
        AlertInsight[Alert Insights]
        DataSummary[Data Summary]
    end
    
    subgraph "Backend"
        Router[Request Router]
        Stream[Streaming Handler]
        Memory[Conversation Memory]
    end
    
    subgraph "ML Commons"
        RootAgent[Root Chat Agent]
        Tools[Agent Tools]
        Models[ML Models]
    end
    
    Entry --> ChatUI
    ChatUI --> Router
    Router --> Stream
    Stream --> RootAgent
    RootAgent --> Tools
    Tools --> Models
    ChatUI --> Memory
    T2V --> RootAgent
    AlertInsight --> RootAgent
    DataSummary --> RootAgent
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    User[User Input] --> UI[Chat UI]
    UI --> API[Backend API]
    API --> Agent[ML Agent]
    Agent --> LLM[LLM Model]
    LLM --> Stream[Streaming Response]
    Stream --> UI
    UI --> Display[Display Response]
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| Chat Interface | Main conversational UI with message history and input |
| Entry Point Button | Single button in header for accessing the chatbot |
| Streaming Handler | Processes real-time response chunks with special character buffering |
| Conversation Memory | Stores and retrieves conversation history |
| Text-to-Visualization | Generates visualizations from natural language with time range support |
| Alert Insights | Provides AI-generated insights for alerts with format instructions |
| Data Summary | Generates summaries of data patterns |
| Auto Aggregation | Suggests appropriate aggregations for visualizations |
| Flyout State Manager | Persists chatbot visibility state to local storage |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|--------|
| `assistant.chat.enabled` | Enable/disable the chatbot feature | `false` |
| `assistant.next.enabled` | Enable experimental features (text-to-viz) | `false` |
| `assistant.chatEnabled` | Admin UI control for chatbot | `false` |
| `assistant.enabled` | Admin UI control for alert summary/anomaly detection | `false` |

### Usage Example

1. Enable the assistant in `opensearch_dashboards.yml`:

```yaml
assistant.chat.enabled: true
assistant.next.enabled: true
```

2. Configure the root agent via API:

```json
PUT .plugins-ml-config/_doc/os_chat
{
    "type": "os_chat_root_agent",
    "configuration": {
        "agent_id": "your_root_agent_id"
    }
}
```

3. Access the chatbot via the button in the OpenSearch Dashboards header.

### Key Features

- **Natural Language Interaction**: Ask questions in plain English
- **Streaming Responses**: Real-time response display with special character buffering
- **Conversation History**: Resume previous conversations
- **Text-to-Visualization**: Generate charts from text descriptions with time range support
- **Alert Insights**: AI-powered alert analysis with consistent formatting
- **Data Summaries**: Automatic data pattern summaries
- **Notebook Integration**: Save conversations to Notebooks
- **Persistent Flyout State**: Chatbot stays open across page navigation
- **Admin UI Controls**: Centralized feature management through admin settings

## Limitations

- Requires ML Commons plugin with configured agents and models
- Streaming output requires compatible backend support
- Text-to-visualization requires PPL queries with valid results and aggregations
- Response quality depends on the underlying LLM model
- Admin UI settings require OpenSearch Dashboards 3.1.0+

## Change History

- **v3.1.0** (2026-01-10): T2viz enhancements (single metric styling, time range support, error prevention), streaming buffer for special characters, persistent flyout state, admin UI settings for centralized feature control, alert summary format instructions
- **v3.0.0** (2025-05-06): Major UI redesign, streaming output support, single button entry point, text-to-visualization enhancements with auto-aggregation, conversation auto-loading
- **v2.18.0** (2024-11-05): Added assistant capabilities for conditional UI rendering, new API to check agent config existence, renamed agentName to agentConfigName for clarity
- **v2.13** (2024): Initial introduction of OpenSearch Assistant for OpenSearch Dashboards


## References

### Documentation
- [OpenSearch Assistant Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.1/dashboards/dashboards-assistant/index/)
- [Build Your Own Chatbot Tutorial](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.1/tutorials/gen-ai/chatbots/build-chatbot/)
- [OpenSearch Assistant Toolkit](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.1/ml-commons-plugin/opensearch-assistant/)
- [Alert Insights](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.1/dashboards/dashboards-assistant/alert-insight/)
- [Data Summary](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.1/dashboards/dashboards-assistant/data-summary/)
- [Text to Visualization](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.1/dashboards/dashboards-assistant/text-to-visualization/)
- [dashboards-assistant Repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant)

### Pull Requests
| Version | PR | Description | Related Issue |
|---------|-----|-------------|---------------|
| v3.1.0 | [#539](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/539) | Style single metric in text2vis |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#545](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/545) | Improve chatbot UX by scrolling user input message to top |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#546](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/546) | Prevent t2viz navigation on PPL errors |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#549](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/549) | Buffer for special characters when streaming |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#553](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/553) | Save chatbot flyout state to local storage |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#557](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/557) | T2viz time range support from context |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#568](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/568) | Add format instruction for alert summary |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#578](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/578) | Admin UI setting for dashboard assistant features |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#398](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/398) | Expose chatEnabled flag to capabilities |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#435](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/435) | Update chatbot UI to align with new look |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#493](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/493) | Support streaming output |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#505](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/505) | Generate visualization on t2v page mount |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#514](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/514) | Add auto aggregation suggest for t2v |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#540](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/540) | Change chatbot entry point to single button |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#267](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/267) | Add assistant capabilities to control rendering components |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#307](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/307) | Expose API to check if agent config name has agent ID configured |   |

Commit message:

docs: add AI Assistant UI report for v2.19.0

docs/features/dashboards-assistant/dashboards-assistant-ai-assistant-chatbot.md, after:

---
tags:
  - dashboards-assistant
---
# AI Assistant / Chatbot

## Summary

The OpenSearch AI Assistant (Chatbot) is an AI-powered conversational interface integrated into OpenSearch Dashboards. It enables users to interact with their data through natural language, generate visualizations from text descriptions, receive alert insights, and get data summaries without requiring specialized query skills. The assistant leverages ML Commons agents and tools to provide intelligent responses.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "OpenSearch Dashboards"
        Entry[Entry Point Button]
        ChatUI[Chat Interface]
        T2V[Text-to-Visualization]
        AlertInsight[Alert Insights]
        DataSummary[Data Summary]
    end
    
    subgraph "Backend"
        Router[Request Router]
        Stream[Streaming Handler]
        Memory[Conversation Memory]
    end
    
    subgraph "ML Commons"
        RootAgent[Root Chat Agent]
        Tools[Agent Tools]
        Models[ML Models]
    end
    
    Entry --> ChatUI
    ChatUI --> Router
    Router --> Stream
    Stream --> RootAgent
    RootAgent --> Tools
    Tools --> Models
    ChatUI --> Memory
    T2V --> RootAgent
    AlertInsight --> RootAgent
    DataSummary --> RootAgent
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    User[User Input] --> UI[Chat UI]
    UI --> API[Backend API]
    API --> Agent[ML Agent]
    Agent --> LLM[LLM Model]
    LLM --> Stream[Streaming Response]
    Stream --> UI
    UI --> Display[Display Response]
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| Chat Interface | Main conversational UI with message history and input |
| Entry Point Button | Single button in header for accessing the chatbot |
| Streaming Handler | Processes real-time response chunks with special character buffering |
| Conversation Memory | Stores and retrieves conversation history |
| Text-to-Visualization | Generates visualizations from natural language with time range support |
| Alert Insights | Provides AI-generated insights for alerts with format instructions |
| Data Summary | Generates summaries of data patterns |
| Auto Aggregation | Suggests appropriate aggregations for visualizations |
| Flyout State Manager | Persists chatbot visibility state to local storage |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|--------|
| `assistant.chat.enabled` | Enable/disable the chatbot feature | `false` |
| `assistant.next.enabled` | Enable experimental features (text-to-viz) | `false` |
| `assistant.chatEnabled` | Admin UI control for chatbot | `false` |
| `assistant.enabled` | Admin UI control for alert summary/anomaly detection | `false` |

### Usage Example

1. Enable the assistant in `opensearch_dashboards.yml`:

```yaml
assistant.chat.enabled: true
assistant.next.enabled: true
```

2. Configure the root agent via API:

```json
PUT .plugins-ml-config/_doc/os_chat
{
    "type": "os_chat_root_agent",
    "configuration": {
        "agent_id": "your_root_agent_id"
    }
}
```

3. Access the chatbot via the button in the OpenSearch Dashboards header.

### Key Features

- **Natural Language Interaction**: Ask questions in plain English
- **Streaming Responses**: Real-time response display with special character buffering
- **Conversation History**: Resume previous conversations
- **Text-to-Visualization**: Generate charts from text descriptions with time range support
- **Alert Insights**: AI-powered alert analysis with consistent formatting
- **Data Summaries**: Automatic data pattern summaries
- **Notebook Integration**: Save conversations to Notebooks
- **Persistent Flyout State**: Chatbot stays open across page navigation
- **Admin UI Controls**: Centralized feature management through admin settings

## Limitations

- Requires ML Commons plugin with configured agents and models
- Streaming output requires compatible backend support
- Text-to-visualization requires PPL queries with valid results and aggregations
- Response quality depends on the underlying LLM model
- Admin UI settings require OpenSearch Dashboards 3.1.0+
- Feature flags require plugin restart to take effect

## Change History

- **v3.1.0** (2026-01-10): T2viz enhancements (single metric styling, time range support, error prevention), streaming buffer for special characters, persistent flyout state, admin UI settings for centralized feature control, alert summary format instructions
- **v3.0.0** (2025-05-06): Major UI redesign, streaming output support, single button entry point, text-to-visualization enhancements with auto-aggregation, conversation auto-loading
- **v2.19.0** (2025-02-25): Responsive chatbot entry redesign, feature flags for trace/feedback/stop/regenerate buttons, in-context summarization UI improvements, dropdown list enhancements, logo configuration, Pipeline architecture for multi-agent execution, improved error handling (404 vs 500)
- **v2.18.0** (2024-11-05): Added assistant capabilities for conditional UI rendering, new API to check agent config existence, renamed agentName to agentConfigName for clarity
- **v2.13** (2024): Initial introduction of OpenSearch Assistant for OpenSearch Dashboards


## References

### Documentation
- [OpenSearch Assistant Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.1/dashboards/dashboards-assistant/index/)
- [Build Your Own Chatbot Tutorial](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.1/tutorials/gen-ai/chatbots/build-chatbot/)
- [OpenSearch Assistant Toolkit](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.1/ml-commons-plugin/opensearch-assistant/)
- [Alert Insights](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.1/dashboards/dashboards-assistant/alert-insight/)
- [Data Summary](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.1/dashboards/dashboards-assistant/data-summary/)
- [Text to Visualization](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.1/dashboards/dashboards-assistant/text-to-visualization/)
- [dashboards-assistant Repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant)

### Pull Requests
| Version | PR | Description | Related Issue |
|---------|-----|-------------|---------------|
| v3.1.0 | [#539](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/539) | Style single metric in text2vis |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#545](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/545) | Improve chatbot UX by scrolling user input message to top |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#546](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/546) | Prevent t2viz navigation on PPL errors |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#549](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/549) | Buffer for special characters when streaming |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#553](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/553) | Save chatbot flyout state to local storage |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#557](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/557) | T2viz time range support from context |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#568](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/568) | Add format instruction for alert summary |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#578](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/578) | Admin UI setting for dashboard assistant features |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#398](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/398) | Expose chatEnabled flag to capabilities |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#435](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/435) | Update chatbot UI to align with new look |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#493](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/493) | Support streaming output |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#505](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/505) | Generate visualization on t2v page mount |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#514](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/514) | Add auto aggregation suggest for t2v |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#540](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/540) | Change chatbot entry point to single button |   |
| v2.19.0 | [#396](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/396) | Chatbot entry UI redesign |   |
| v2.19.0 | [#379](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/379) | Add feature flags for traces and feedback |   |
| v2.19.0 | [#394](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/394) | Hide stop/regenerate buttons via feature flag |   |
| v2.19.0 | [#392](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/392) | Update UI for in-context summarization |   |
| v2.19.0 | [#407](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/407) | Update dropdown list button label |   |
| v2.19.0 | [#395](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/395) | Add query assistant summary to dropdown |   |
| v2.19.0 | [#401](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/401) | Set logo config in assistant |   |
| v2.19.0 | [#409](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/409) | Feature flag for delete conversation API |   |
| v2.19.0 | [#410](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/410) | Feature flag for rename conversation API |   |
| v2.19.0 | [#376](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/376) | Refactor multi agents execution with Pipeline |   |
| v2.19.0 | [#384](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/384) | Return 404 instead of 500 for missing agent config |   |
| v2.19.0 | [#368](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/368) | Visual editor alerts navigation to discover |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#267](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/267) | Add assistant capabilities to control rendering components |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#307](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-assistant/pull/307) | Expose API to check if agent config name has agent ID configured |   |
