docs/features/security-analytics-dashboards/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin.md, before:

# Security Analytics Dashboards Plugin

## Summary

The Security Analytics Dashboards plugin provides the user interface for OpenSearch Security Analytics, enabling security teams to detect threats, investigate security events, and manage detection rules through OpenSearch Dashboards. It integrates with the Security Analytics backend plugin to provide visualization of findings, alerts, correlations, and threat intelligence data.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "OpenSearch Dashboards"
        UI[Security Analytics UI]
        Nav[Navigation & Routing]
        State[State Management]
    end
    
    subgraph "UI Components"
        Det[Detectors]
        Find[Findings]
        Alert[Alerts]
        Corr[Correlations]
        Rules[Rules]
        TI[Threat Intel]
        LogTypes[Log Types]
    end
    
    subgraph "Backend"
        SA[Security Analytics Plugin]
        OS[OpenSearch]
    end
    
    UI --> Nav
    UI --> State
    Nav --> Det
    Nav --> Find
    Nav --> Alert
    Nav --> Corr
    Nav --> Rules
    Nav --> TI
    Nav --> LogTypes
    
    Det --> SA
    Find --> SA
    Alert --> SA
    Corr --> SA
    Rules --> SA
    TI --> SA
    LogTypes --> SA
    SA --> OS
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| Detectors | Create and manage threat detectors with detection rules |
| Findings | View and investigate security findings generated by detectors |
| Alerts | Configure and manage alerts based on findings |
| Correlations | Visualize relationships between security events |
| Rules | Import, create, and customize Sigma detection rules |
| Threat Intel | Manage threat intelligence sources and IOCs |
| Log Types | Configure log type mappings for detection |

### Key Features

- **Detector Management**: Create detectors with custom rules and field mappings
- **Findings Dashboard**: View, filter, and investigate security findings
- **Alert Configuration**: Set up notifications for security events
- **Correlation Graph**: Visualize relationships between correlated findings
- **Rule Editor**: Create and customize Sigma-based detection rules
- **Threat Intelligence**: Integrate external threat feeds and IOC sources
- **Multi-Data Source Support**: Work with multiple OpenSearch data sources

### Configuration

The plugin integrates with OpenSearch Dashboards and requires the Security Analytics backend plugin.

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `securityAnalytics.enabled` | Enable/disable the plugin | `true` |

## Limitations

- Requires Security Analytics backend plugin to be installed
- Some features require specific OpenSearch Dashboards versions for full compatibility
- Workspace integration requires proper configuration of workspace availability settings

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v2.17.0 | [#1093](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin/pull/1093) | Navigation category and workspace availability fix |
| v2.17.0 | [#1107](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin/pull/1107) | UI fixes for correlation graph, pagination, filtering |
| v2.17.0 | [#1123](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin/pull/1123) | PageHeader and SideNav bug fixes |
| v2.17.0 | [#1132](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin/pull/1132) | Multi data source support check |
| v2.17.0 | [#1136](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin/pull/1136) | Import fix for webpack compatibility |
| v2.17.0 | [#1144](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin/pull/1144) | Remove problematic import |
| v2.17.0 | [#1149](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin/pull/1149) | URL state passthrough fix |

## References

- [About Security Analytics](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.17/security-analytics/): Overview of Security Analytics
- [Setting up Security Analytics](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.17/security-analytics/sec-analytics-config/index/): Configuration guide
- [Using Security Analytics](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.17/security-analytics/usage/index/): Usage documentation
- [OpenSearch Security for Security Analytics](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.17/security-analytics/security/): Security configuration
- [security-analytics-dashboards-plugin](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin): GitHub repository

## Change History

- **v2.17.0** (2024-09-17): Multiple UI bugfixes including navigation, webpack errors, multi-data source support, and various UI/UX improvements

Commit message:

docs: add Security Analytics UI Updates report for v2.17.0 (#538)

docs/features/security-analytics-dashboards/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin.md, after:

# Security Analytics Dashboards Plugin

## Summary

The Security Analytics Dashboards plugin provides the user interface for OpenSearch Security Analytics, enabling security teams to detect threats, investigate security events, and manage detection rules through OpenSearch Dashboards. It integrates with the Security Analytics backend plugin to provide visualization of findings, alerts, correlations, and threat intelligence data.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "OpenSearch Dashboards"
        UI[Security Analytics UI]
        Nav[Navigation & Routing]
        State[State Management]
    end
    
    subgraph "UI Components"
        Det[Detectors]
        Find[Findings]
        Alert[Alerts]
        Corr[Correlations]
        Rules[Rules]
        TI[Threat Intel]
        LogTypes[Log Types]
    end
    
    subgraph "Backend"
        SA[Security Analytics Plugin]
        OS[OpenSearch]
    end
    
    UI --> Nav
    UI --> State
    Nav --> Det
    Nav --> Find
    Nav --> Alert
    Nav --> Corr
    Nav --> Rules
    Nav --> TI
    Nav --> LogTypes
    
    Det --> SA
    Find --> SA
    Alert --> SA
    Corr --> SA
    Rules --> SA
    TI --> SA
    LogTypes --> SA
    SA --> OS
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| Detectors | Create and manage threat detectors with detection rules |
| Findings | View and investigate security findings generated by detectors |
| Alerts | Configure and manage alerts based on findings |
| Correlations | Visualize relationships between security events |
| Rules | Import, create, and customize Sigma detection rules |
| Threat Intel | Manage threat intelligence sources and IOCs |
| Log Types | Configure log type mappings for detection |

### Key Features

- **Detector Management**: Create detectors with custom rules and field mappings
- **Findings Dashboard**: View, filter, and investigate security findings
- **Alert Configuration**: Set up notifications for security events
- **Correlation Graph**: Visualize relationships between correlated findings
- **Rule Editor**: Create and customize Sigma-based detection rules
- **Threat Intelligence**: Integrate external threat feeds and IOC sources
- **Multi-Data Source Support**: Work with multiple OpenSearch data sources

### Configuration

The plugin integrates with OpenSearch Dashboards and requires the Security Analytics backend plugin.

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `securityAnalytics.enabled` | Enable/disable the plugin | `true` |

## Limitations

- Requires Security Analytics backend plugin to be installed
- Some features require specific OpenSearch Dashboards versions for full compatibility
- Workspace integration requires proper configuration of workspace availability settings

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v2.17.0 | [#1100](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin/pull/1100) | Update data source selection label and help text |
| v2.17.0 | [#1124](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin/pull/1124) | Add threat alerts card for Analytics (All) workspace |
| v2.17.0 | [#1125](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin/pull/1125) | Update URL with data source ID; redirect on reload |
| v2.17.0 | [#1147](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin/pull/1147) | Fit and Finishes Changes for Security Analytics |
| v2.17.0 | [#1093](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin/pull/1093) | Navigation category and workspace availability fix |
| v2.17.0 | [#1107](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin/pull/1107) | UI fixes for correlation graph, pagination, filtering |
| v2.17.0 | [#1123](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin/pull/1123) | PageHeader and SideNav bug fixes |
| v2.17.0 | [#1132](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin/pull/1132) | Multi data source support check |
| v2.17.0 | [#1136](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin/pull/1136) | Import fix for webpack compatibility |
| v2.17.0 | [#1144](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin/pull/1144) | Remove problematic import |
| v2.17.0 | [#1149](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin/pull/1149) | URL state passthrough fix |

## References

- [About Security Analytics](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.17/security-analytics/): Overview of Security Analytics
- [Setting up Security Analytics](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.17/security-analytics/sec-analytics-config/index/): Configuration guide
- [Using Security Analytics](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.17/security-analytics/usage/index/): Usage documentation
- [OpenSearch Security for Security Analytics](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.17/security-analytics/security/): Security configuration
- [security-analytics-dashboards-plugin](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security-analytics-dashboards-plugin): GitHub repository

## Change History

- **v2.17.0** (2024-09-17): UI enhancements including data source label updates, threat alerts card for Analytics workspace, URL data source ID handling, and comprehensive fit-and-finish styling updates
- **v2.17.0** (2024-09-17): Multiple UI bugfixes including navigation, webpack errors, multi-data source support, and various UI/UX improvements
