docs/features/opensearch/code-coverage-gradle.md, before:

# Code Coverage (Gradle)

## Summary

OpenSearch provides local code coverage generation using Gradle with the JaCoCo plugin. This feature enables developers to generate coverage reports for unit tests, integration tests, and REST tests directly from their local environment, ensuring consistency with the coverage reported by GitHub CI workflows.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Gradle Build System"
        GC[gradle/code-coverage.gradle]
        JP[JaCoCo Plugin<br/>v0.8.13]
    end
    
    subgraph "Test Types"
        UT[Unit Tests<br/>test task]
        ICT[Internal Cluster Tests<br/>internalClusterTest task]
        JRT[Java REST Tests<br/>javaRestTest task]
        YRT[YAML REST Tests<br/>yamlRestTest task]
    end
    
    subgraph "Execution Data"
        ED1[test.exec]
        ED2[internalClusterTest.exec]
        ED3[javaRestTest.exec]
        ED4[yamlRestTest.exec]
    end
    
    subgraph "Report Tasks"
        JTR[jacocoTestReport]
        TCR[testCodeCoverageReport]
        TCRI[testCodeCoverageReportInternalClusterTest]
        TCRJ[testCodeCoverageReportJavaRestTest]
        TCRY[testCodeCoverageReportYamlRestTest]
    end
    
    subgraph "Output"
        XML[XML Report]
        HTML[HTML Report]
        CSV[CSV Report]
    end
    
    GC --> JP
    JP --> UT
    JP --> ICT
    JP --> JRT
    JP --> YRT
    
    UT --> ED1
    ICT --> ED2
    JRT --> ED3
    YRT --> ED4
    
    ED1 --> JTR
    ED2 --> JTR
    ED3 --> JTR
    ED4 --> JTR
    
    JTR --> XML
    JTR --> HTML
    JTR --> CSV
    
    TCR --> XML
    TCRI --> XML
    TCRJ --> XML
    TCRY --> XML
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    A[Run Tests] --> B[JaCoCo Agent<br/>Instruments Code]
    B --> C[Generate .exec Files]
    C --> D[jacocoTestReport Task]
    D --> E[Aggregate Execution Data]
    E --> F[Generate Reports]
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `gradle/code-coverage.gradle` | Main configuration file for JaCoCo integration |
| `jacocoTestReport` | Enhanced task that aggregates all test type execution data |
| `testCodeCoverageReport` | Dedicated report task for unit tests |
| `testCodeCoverageReportInternalClusterTest` | Dedicated report task for internal cluster tests |
| `testCodeCoverageReportJavaRestTest` | Dedicated report task for Java REST tests |
| `testCodeCoverageReportYamlRestTest` | Dedicated report task for YAML REST tests |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `tests.coverage` | Enable coverage generation during `check` task | `false` |
| `tests.coverage.report.xml` | Generate XML format report | `true` |
| `tests.coverage.report.html` | Generate HTML format report | `false` |
| `tests.coverage.report.csv` | Generate CSV format report | `false` |

### Usage Examples

#### Unit Test Coverage

```bash
# Run unit tests for a specific module
./gradlew :server:test

# Generate coverage report
./gradlew :server:jacocoTestReport
```

#### Specific Test Coverage

```bash
# Run specific test
./gradlew :server:test --tests "org.opensearch.search.approximate.ApproximatePointRangeQueryTests.testNycTaxiDataDistribution"

# Generate HTML report
./gradlew :server:jacocoTestReport -Dtests.coverage.report.html=true
```

#### Integration Test Coverage

```bash
# Run internal cluster tests
./gradlew :server:internalClusterTest

# Generate coverage report
./gradlew :server:jacocoTestReport
```

#### REST Test Coverage

```bash
# Run Java REST tests
./gradlew :qa:die-with-dignity:javaRestTest

# Generate HTML report
./gradlew :qa:die-with-dignity:jacocoTestReport -Dtests.coverage.report.html=true
```

#### Combined Coverage with Check Task

```bash
# Run all tests with coverage enabled
./gradlew check -Dtests.coverage=true
```

### Report Output Location

Reports are generated at:
```
$buildDir/build/reports/jacoco/test/html/
```

## Limitations

- Coverage reports require running tests first to generate `.exec` execution data files
- The `jacocoTestReport` task only executes if at least one `.exec` file exists
- HTML and CSV reports are disabled by default to conserve disk space
- Coverage is measured at the line and branch level

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v3.2.0 | [#18509](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18509) | Initial implementation - local code coverage with Gradle |

## References

- [PR #18509](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18509): Main implementation
- [PR #18358](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18358): Related coverage improvement work
- [PR #18376](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18376): javaRestTest coverage addition
- [JaCoCo Gradle Plugin](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/jacoco_plugin.html): Official Gradle documentation
- [Issue #850](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/850): Original feature request for test coverage reporting

## Change History

- **v3.2.0** (2025-06-13): Initial implementation - ability to run code coverage locally with Gradle and produce JaCoCo reports

Commit message:

docs: add test-infrastructure report for v3.3.0 (#1492)

docs/features/opensearch/code-coverage-gradle.md, after:

# Code Coverage (Gradle)

## Summary

OpenSearch provides local code coverage generation using Gradle with the JaCoCo plugin. This feature enables developers to generate coverage reports for unit tests, integration tests, and REST tests directly from their local environment, ensuring consistency with the coverage reported by GitHub CI workflows.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Gradle Build System"
        GC[gradle/code-coverage.gradle]
        JP[JaCoCo Plugin<br/>v0.8.13]
    end
    
    subgraph "Test Types"
        UT[Unit Tests<br/>test task]
        ICT[Internal Cluster Tests<br/>internalClusterTest task]
        JRT[Java REST Tests<br/>javaRestTest task]
        YRT[YAML REST Tests<br/>yamlRestTest task]
    end
    
    subgraph "Execution Data"
        ED1[test.exec]
        ED2[internalClusterTest.exec]
        ED3[javaRestTest.exec]
        ED4[yamlRestTest.exec]
    end
    
    subgraph "Report Tasks"
        JTR[jacocoTestReport]
        TCR[testCodeCoverageReport]
        TCRI[testCodeCoverageReportInternalClusterTest]
        TCRJ[testCodeCoverageReportJavaRestTest]
        TCRY[testCodeCoverageReportYamlRestTest]
    end
    
    subgraph "Output"
        XML[XML Report]
        HTML[HTML Report]
        CSV[CSV Report]
    end
    
    GC --> JP
    JP --> UT
    JP --> ICT
    JP --> JRT
    JP --> YRT
    
    UT --> ED1
    ICT --> ED2
    JRT --> ED3
    YRT --> ED4
    
    ED1 --> JTR
    ED2 --> JTR
    ED3 --> JTR
    ED4 --> JTR
    
    JTR --> XML
    JTR --> HTML
    JTR --> CSV
    
    TCR --> XML
    TCRI --> XML
    TCRJ --> XML
    TCRY --> XML
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    A[Run Tests] --> B[JaCoCo Agent<br/>Instruments Code]
    B --> C[Generate .exec Files]
    C --> D[jacocoTestReport Task]
    D --> E[Aggregate Execution Data]
    E --> F[Generate Reports]
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `gradle/code-coverage.gradle` | Main configuration file for JaCoCo integration |
| `jacocoTestReport` | Enhanced task that aggregates all test type execution data |
| `testCodeCoverageReport` | Dedicated report task for unit tests |
| `testCodeCoverageReportInternalClusterTest` | Dedicated report task for internal cluster tests |
| `testCodeCoverageReportJavaRestTest` | Dedicated report task for Java REST tests |
| `testCodeCoverageReportYamlRestTest` | Dedicated report task for YAML REST tests |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `tests.coverage` | Enable coverage generation during `check` task | `false` |
| `tests.coverage.report.xml` | Generate XML format report | `true` |
| `tests.coverage.report.html` | Generate HTML format report | `false` |
| `tests.coverage.report.csv` | Generate CSV format report | `false` |

### Usage Examples

#### Unit Test Coverage

```bash
# Run unit tests for a specific module
./gradlew :server:test

# Generate coverage report
./gradlew :server:jacocoTestReport
```

#### Specific Test Coverage

```bash
# Run specific test
./gradlew :server:test --tests "org.opensearch.search.approximate.ApproximatePointRangeQueryTests.testNycTaxiDataDistribution"

# Generate HTML report
./gradlew :server:jacocoTestReport -Dtests.coverage.report.html=true
```

#### Integration Test Coverage

```bash
# Run internal cluster tests
./gradlew :server:internalClusterTest

# Generate coverage report
./gradlew :server:jacocoTestReport
```

#### REST Test Coverage

```bash
# Run Java REST tests
./gradlew :qa:die-with-dignity:javaRestTest

# Generate HTML report
./gradlew :qa:die-with-dignity:jacocoTestReport -Dtests.coverage.report.html=true
```

#### Combined Coverage with Check Task

```bash
# Run all tests with coverage enabled
./gradlew check -Dtests.coverage=true
```

### Report Output Location

Reports are generated at:
```
$buildDir/build/reports/jacoco/test/html/
```

## Limitations

- Coverage reports require running tests first to generate `.exec` execution data files
- The `jacocoTestReport` task only executes if at least one `.exec` file exists
- HTML and CSV reports are disabled by default to conserve disk space
- Coverage is measured at the line and branch level

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v3.3.0 | [#19165](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/19165) | Include internalClusterTests and yamlRestTest in code coverage report |
| v3.3.0 | [#19085](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/19085) | Grant access to testclusters dir for tests |
| v3.2.0 | [#18509](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18509) | Initial implementation - local code coverage with Gradle |

## References

- [PR #18509](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18509): Main implementation
- [PR #18358](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18358): Related coverage improvement work
- [PR #18376](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18376): javaRestTest coverage addition
- [Issue #19140](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/19140): Bug report - Code coverage report does not include internalClusterTests
- [JaCoCo Gradle Plugin](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/jacoco_plugin.html): Official Gradle documentation
- [Issue #850](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/850): Original feature request for test coverage reporting

## Change History

- **v3.3.0** (2025-10-14): Expanded coverage to include internalClusterTest and yamlRestTest; added testclusters directory permissions
- **v3.2.0** (2025-06-13): Initial implementation - ability to run code coverage locally with Gradle and produce JaCoCo reports
