docs/features/opensearch/combined-fields-query.md, before:

# Combined Fields Query

## Summary

The Combined Fields Query is a full-text search query type that treats multiple text fields as a single combined field for scoring purposes. It uses Lucene's `CombinedFieldQuery` to implement the BM25F (BM25 for multi-field documents) scoring algorithm, providing more accurate relevance ranking when searching across multiple related text fields such as title, body, and summary.

This query is particularly useful when you want to search across multiple fields that conceptually represent the same content (e.g., a document's title and body) and want the scoring to reflect how well the query matches the document as a whole, rather than scoring each field independently.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Query Execution Flow"
        A[User Query] --> B[combined_fields Query DSL]
        B --> C[CombinedFieldsQueryBuilder]
        C --> D{Field Validation}
        D -->|Valid Text Fields| E{Analyzer Validation}
        D -->|Invalid Field Type| F[IllegalArgumentException]
        E -->|Same Analyzer| G[Build Query]
        E -->|Different Analyzers| H[IllegalArgumentException]
        G --> I[Lucene CombinedFieldQuery]
    end
    
    subgraph "BM25F Scoring"
        I --> J[Combine Document Frequencies]
        J --> K[Apply Field Weights]
        K --> L[Calculate BM25F Score]
        L --> M[Return Ranked Results]
    end
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph Input
        Q[Query Text] --> A[Analyzer]
        F[Fields + Weights] --> V[Validator]
    end
    
    subgraph Processing
        A --> T[Tokenized Terms]
        V --> MF[Mapped Fields]
        T --> CFQ[CombinedFieldQuery Builder]
        MF --> CFQ
    end
    
    subgraph Scoring
        CFQ --> TF[Combined Term Frequency]
        CFQ --> DF[Shared Document Frequency]
        TF --> BM25F[BM25F Score]
        DF --> BM25F
    end
    
    subgraph Output
        BM25F --> R[Ranked Results]
    end
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `CombinedFieldsQueryBuilder` | Main query builder class that handles query construction, validation, and serialization |
| `Builder` (inner class) | Extends Lucene's `QueryBuilder` to create `CombinedFieldQuery` instances with BM25F scoring |
| `CombinedFieldQuery` (Lucene) | Underlying Lucene query that implements the BM25F scoring algorithm |

### Configuration

| Parameter | Type | Description | Default |
|-----------|------|-------------|---------|
| `query` | String | The search text to be analyzed and matched against the specified fields | Required |
| `fields` | Array | List of text field names with optional boost values (e.g., `["title^3", "content^1.5", "summary"]`) | Required |
| `operator` | String | Boolean operator for combining terms: `AND` (all terms must match) or `OR` (any term can match) | `OR` |
| `minimum_should_match` | String | Minimum number of optional clauses that must match. Supports absolute numbers (`"2"`), percentages (`"75%"`), and complex expressions (`"2<75%"`) | None |
| `boost` | Float | Query-level boost factor applied to the entire query score | `1.0` |
| `_name` | String | Optional query name for identification in search responses | None |

### Usage Examples

#### Basic Usage

```json
GET articles/_search
{
  "query": {
    "combined_fields": {
      "query": "machine learning algorithms",
      "fields": ["title", "abstract", "content"]
    }
  }
}
```

#### With Field Boosting

```json
GET articles/_search
{
  "query": {
    "combined_fields": {
      "query": "distributed systems",
      "fields": ["title^3", "abstract^2", "content"],
      "operator": "AND"
    }
  }
}
```

#### With Minimum Should Match

```json
GET articles/_search
{
  "query": {
    "combined_fields": {
      "query": "natural language processing techniques",
      "fields": ["title^3", "summary^2", "body"],
      "operator": "or",
      "minimum_should_match": "75%"
    }
  }
}
```

### How BM25F Scoring Works

The BM25F algorithm extends the traditional BM25 scoring to handle multiple fields:

1. **Term Frequency Combination**: Term frequencies from all specified fields are combined, weighted by field boost values
2. **Shared Document Frequency**: Document frequency is calculated across all fields together, not per-field
3. **Unified Scoring**: The final score treats the document as if all fields were concatenated into a single field

This approach provides more intuitive scoring compared to alternatives like `multi_match` with `cross_fields`, which scores each field independently and then combines scores.

### Comparison with Other Multi-Field Queries

| Query Type | Scoring Approach | Use Case |
|------------|------------------|----------|
| `combined_fields` | BM25F (unified field scoring) | Related text fields representing same content |
| `multi_match` (best_fields) | Max score across fields | Different content types per field |
| `multi_match` (cross_fields) | Per-field scoring, combined | Mixed field types (may have issues) |
| `query_string` | Per-field with operators | Complex query syntax needed |

## Limitations

- **Text Fields Only**: Only supports text field types. Attempting to use keyword, numeric, date, or other field types will result in an `IllegalArgumentException`
- **Same Analyzer Required**: All specified fields must use the same search analyzer. Fields with different analyzers cannot be combined in a single query
- **No Phrase Support**: Phrase queries (quoted strings like `"exact phrase"`) are explicitly not supported and will throw an error
- **Experimental Status**: The feature is marked as `@opensearch.experimental`, indicating the API may change in future releases

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v3.2.0 | [#18724](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18724) | Add combined_fields query to utilize Lucene's CombinedField (BM25F Text) |

## References

- [Issue #3996](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/3996): Original feature request for combined_fields (BM25F) support
- [Documentation Issue #10209](https://github.com/opensearch-project/documentation-website/issues/10209): Documentation request for combined_fields query
- [BM25F and combined_fields query](https://opensourceconnections.com/blog/2021/06/30/better-term-centric-scoring-in-elasticsearch-with-bm25f-and-the-combined_fields-query/): Background on BM25F scoring algorithm and its benefits

## Change History

- **v3.2.0** (2025-07): Initial implementation of combined_fields query with BM25F scoring support

Commit message:

refactor: restructure References sections per steering guidelines
- Move Change History before References
- Merge Related PRs into References section
- Add subsections: Documentation, Pull Requests, Issues (Design / RFC)
- Section order: Summary → Details → Limitations → Change History → References

Closes #1944

docs/features/opensearch/combined-fields-query.md, after:

# Combined Fields Query

## Summary

The Combined Fields Query is a full-text search query type that treats multiple text fields as a single combined field for scoring purposes. It uses Lucene's `CombinedFieldQuery` to implement the BM25F (BM25 for multi-field documents) scoring algorithm, providing more accurate relevance ranking when searching across multiple related text fields such as title, body, and summary.

This query is particularly useful when you want to search across multiple fields that conceptually represent the same content (e.g., a document's title and body) and want the scoring to reflect how well the query matches the document as a whole, rather than scoring each field independently.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Query Execution Flow"
        A[User Query] --> B[combined_fields Query DSL]
        B --> C[CombinedFieldsQueryBuilder]
        C --> D{Field Validation}
        D -->|Valid Text Fields| E{Analyzer Validation}
        D -->|Invalid Field Type| F[IllegalArgumentException]
        E -->|Same Analyzer| G[Build Query]
        E -->|Different Analyzers| H[IllegalArgumentException]
        G --> I[Lucene CombinedFieldQuery]
    end
    
    subgraph "BM25F Scoring"
        I --> J[Combine Document Frequencies]
        J --> K[Apply Field Weights]
        K --> L[Calculate BM25F Score]
        L --> M[Return Ranked Results]
    end
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph Input
        Q[Query Text] --> A[Analyzer]
        F[Fields + Weights] --> V[Validator]
    end
    
    subgraph Processing
        A --> T[Tokenized Terms]
        V --> MF[Mapped Fields]
        T --> CFQ[CombinedFieldQuery Builder]
        MF --> CFQ
    end
    
    subgraph Scoring
        CFQ --> TF[Combined Term Frequency]
        CFQ --> DF[Shared Document Frequency]
        TF --> BM25F[BM25F Score]
        DF --> BM25F
    end
    
    subgraph Output
        BM25F --> R[Ranked Results]
    end
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `CombinedFieldsQueryBuilder` | Main query builder class that handles query construction, validation, and serialization |
| `Builder` (inner class) | Extends Lucene's `QueryBuilder` to create `CombinedFieldQuery` instances with BM25F scoring |
| `CombinedFieldQuery` (Lucene) | Underlying Lucene query that implements the BM25F scoring algorithm |

### Configuration

| Parameter | Type | Description | Default |
|-----------|------|-------------|---------|
| `query` | String | The search text to be analyzed and matched against the specified fields | Required |
| `fields` | Array | List of text field names with optional boost values (e.g., `["title^3", "content^1.5", "summary"]`) | Required |
| `operator` | String | Boolean operator for combining terms: `AND` (all terms must match) or `OR` (any term can match) | `OR` |
| `minimum_should_match` | String | Minimum number of optional clauses that must match. Supports absolute numbers (`"2"`), percentages (`"75%"`), and complex expressions (`"2<75%"`) | None |
| `boost` | Float | Query-level boost factor applied to the entire query score | `1.0` |
| `_name` | String | Optional query name for identification in search responses | None |

### Usage Examples

#### Basic Usage

```json
GET articles/_search
{
  "query": {
    "combined_fields": {
      "query": "machine learning algorithms",
      "fields": ["title", "abstract", "content"]
    }
  }
}
```

#### With Field Boosting

```json
GET articles/_search
{
  "query": {
    "combined_fields": {
      "query": "distributed systems",
      "fields": ["title^3", "abstract^2", "content"],
      "operator": "AND"
    }
  }
}
```

#### With Minimum Should Match

```json
GET articles/_search
{
  "query": {
    "combined_fields": {
      "query": "natural language processing techniques",
      "fields": ["title^3", "summary^2", "body"],
      "operator": "or",
      "minimum_should_match": "75%"
    }
  }
}
```

### How BM25F Scoring Works

The BM25F algorithm extends the traditional BM25 scoring to handle multiple fields:

1. **Term Frequency Combination**: Term frequencies from all specified fields are combined, weighted by field boost values
2. **Shared Document Frequency**: Document frequency is calculated across all fields together, not per-field
3. **Unified Scoring**: The final score treats the document as if all fields were concatenated into a single field

This approach provides more intuitive scoring compared to alternatives like `multi_match` with `cross_fields`, which scores each field independently and then combines scores.

### Comparison with Other Multi-Field Queries

| Query Type | Scoring Approach | Use Case |
|------------|------------------|----------|
| `combined_fields` | BM25F (unified field scoring) | Related text fields representing same content |
| `multi_match` (best_fields) | Max score across fields | Different content types per field |
| `multi_match` (cross_fields) | Per-field scoring, combined | Mixed field types (may have issues) |
| `query_string` | Per-field with operators | Complex query syntax needed |

## Limitations

- **Text Fields Only**: Only supports text field types. Attempting to use keyword, numeric, date, or other field types will result in an `IllegalArgumentException`
- **Same Analyzer Required**: All specified fields must use the same search analyzer. Fields with different analyzers cannot be combined in a single query
- **No Phrase Support**: Phrase queries (quoted strings like `"exact phrase"`) are explicitly not supported and will throw an error
- **Experimental Status**: The feature is marked as `@opensearch.experimental`, indicating the API may change in future releases

## Change History

- **v3.2.0** (2025-07): Initial implementation of combined_fields query with BM25F scoring support

## References

### Blog Posts
- [BM25F and combined_fields query](https://opensourceconnections.com/blog/2021/06/30/better-term-centric-scoring-in-elasticsearch-with-bm25f-and-the-combined_fields-query/): Background on BM25F scoring algorithm and its benefits

### Pull Requests
| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v3.2.0 | [#18724](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18724) | Add combined_fields query to utilize Lucene's CombinedField (BM25F Text) |

### Issues (Design / RFC)
- [Issue #3996](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/3996): Original feature request for combined_fields (BM25F) support
- [Documentation Issue #10209](https://github.com/opensearch-project/documentation-website/issues/10209): Documentation request for combined_fields query
