docs/features/opensearch/docrequest-refactoring.md, before:

# DocRequest Interface

## Summary

The `DocRequest` interface provides a generic abstraction for ActionRequests that operate on a single document in OpenSearch. It serves as a foundation for categorizing document-level operations and enables the Security plugin to implement fine-grained resource-level access control for plugin-defined resources such as ML models, anomaly detectors, and report definitions.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "ActionRequest Hierarchy"
        AR[ActionRequest]
        DocR[DocRequest]
        DWR[DocWriteRequest]
        IR[IndexRequest]
        UR[UpdateRequest]
        DR[DeleteRequest]
        GR[GetRequest]
        
        AR --> DocR
        DocR --> DWR
        DWR --> IR
        DWR --> UR
        DWR --> DR
        DocR --> GR
    end
    
    subgraph "Plugin Integration"
        PR[Plugin Request]
        SEC[Security Plugin]
        RAE[ResourceAccessEvaluator]
        
        PR -.->|implements| DocR
        SEC --> RAE
        RAE -->|evaluates| DocR
    end
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph "Request Processing"
        REQ[DocRequest]
        SF[Security Filter]
        RAE[ResourceAccessEvaluator]
        IDX[index]
        ID[id]
        TYPE[type]
    end
    
    REQ --> SF
    SF --> RAE
    RAE --> IDX
    RAE --> ID
    RAE --> TYPE
    RAE -->|ALLOW/DENY| SF
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `DocRequest` | Generic interface for single-document operations |
| `DocRequest.index()` | Returns the target index name |
| `DocRequest.id()` | Returns the document ID |
| `DocRequest.type()` | Returns the resource type for sharing context |
| `DocWriteRequest` | Extended interface for write operations (Index, Update, Delete) |
| `GetRequest` | Read operation that now implements `DocRequest` |

### Configuration

This feature does not require configuration. It is a core API change that plugins can optionally leverage.

For resource sharing functionality, the Security plugin settings are:

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `plugins.security.experimental.resource_sharing.enabled` | Enable resource sharing | `false` |
| `plugins.security.experimental.resource_sharing.protected_types` | Resource types with access control | `[]` |

### Usage Example

#### Implementing DocRequest in a Plugin

```java
/**
 * Request to get a report definition - implements DocRequest for resource sharing
 */
public class GetReportDefinitionRequest extends ActionRequest implements DocRequest {
    private final String index;
    private final String reportId;
    
    public GetReportDefinitionRequest(String index, String reportId) {
        this.index = index;
        this.reportId = reportId;
    }
    
    @Override
    public String index() {
        return index;
    }
    
    @Override
    public String id() {
        return reportId;
    }
    
    @Override
    public String type() {
        return "report_definition";
    }
    
    @Override
    public ActionRequestValidationException validate() {
        return null;
    }
}
```

#### Security Plugin Integration

When a plugin implements `DocRequest`, the Security plugin can automatically evaluate access:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant Plugin as Resource Plugin
    participant SecFilter as Security Filter
    participant RAE as ResourceAccessEvaluator
    participant RSIDX as Sharing Index

    User->>Plugin: Request (e.g., GET /resource/{id})
    Plugin->>SecFilter: DocRequest
    SecFilter->>RAE: Evaluate (user, action, DocRequest)
    RAE->>RSIDX: Fetch sharing doc by resource_id
    RSIDX-->>RAE: share_with + created_by
    RAE->>RAE: Check access level
    alt Allowed
        RAE-->>SecFilter: ALLOW
        SecFilter-->>Plugin: Proceed
        Plugin-->>User: 200 OK
    else Denied
        RAE-->>SecFilter: DENY
        SecFilter-->>User: 403 Forbidden
    end
```

## Limitations

- Only applicable to single-document operations
- Resource sharing requires Security plugin with experimental feature enabled
- The `type()` method must be overridden for custom resource types
- Bulk operations are not directly supported (individual items in bulk use `DocWriteRequest`)

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v3.3.0 | [opensearch#19313](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/19313) | Add new extensible method to DocRequest to specify type |
| v3.3.0 | [anomaly-detection#1566](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1566) | Adds resource types to DocRequests in Anomaly Detection |
| v3.1.0 | [#18269](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18269) | Create generic DocRequest to better categorize ActionRequests |

## References

- [Issue #4500](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security/issues/4500): Resource Permissions and Sharing (Security plugin)
- [Blog: Introducing resource sharing](https://opensearch.org/blog/introducing-resource-sharing-a-new-access-control-model-for-opensearch/): A new access control model for OpenSearch

## Change History

- **v3.3.0** (2026-01-10): Added `type()` method to DocRequest interface for resource sharing; Anomaly Detection plugin implements resource types for detectors and forecasters
- **v3.1.0** (2025-05-15): Initial implementation - introduced `DocRequest` interface, updated `DocWriteRequest` to extend it, and made `GetRequest` implement it

Commit message:

refactor: restructure References sections per steering guidelines
- Move Change History before References
- Merge Related PRs into References section
- Add subsections: Documentation, Pull Requests, Issues (Design / RFC)
- Section order: Summary → Details → Limitations → Change History → References

Closes #1944

docs/features/opensearch/docrequest-refactoring.md, after:

# DocRequest Interface

## Summary

The `DocRequest` interface provides a generic abstraction for ActionRequests that operate on a single document in OpenSearch. It serves as a foundation for categorizing document-level operations and enables the Security plugin to implement fine-grained resource-level access control for plugin-defined resources such as ML models, anomaly detectors, and report definitions.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "ActionRequest Hierarchy"
        AR[ActionRequest]
        DocR[DocRequest]
        DWR[DocWriteRequest]
        IR[IndexRequest]
        UR[UpdateRequest]
        DR[DeleteRequest]
        GR[GetRequest]
        
        AR --> DocR
        DocR --> DWR
        DWR --> IR
        DWR --> UR
        DWR --> DR
        DocR --> GR
    end
    
    subgraph "Plugin Integration"
        PR[Plugin Request]
        SEC[Security Plugin]
        RAE[ResourceAccessEvaluator]
        
        PR -.->|implements| DocR
        SEC --> RAE
        RAE -->|evaluates| DocR
    end
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph "Request Processing"
        REQ[DocRequest]
        SF[Security Filter]
        RAE[ResourceAccessEvaluator]
        IDX[index]
        ID[id]
        TYPE[type]
    end
    
    REQ --> SF
    SF --> RAE
    RAE --> IDX
    RAE --> ID
    RAE --> TYPE
    RAE -->|ALLOW/DENY| SF
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `DocRequest` | Generic interface for single-document operations |
| `DocRequest.index()` | Returns the target index name |
| `DocRequest.id()` | Returns the document ID |
| `DocRequest.type()` | Returns the resource type for sharing context |
| `DocWriteRequest` | Extended interface for write operations (Index, Update, Delete) |
| `GetRequest` | Read operation that now implements `DocRequest` |

### Configuration

This feature does not require configuration. It is a core API change that plugins can optionally leverage.

For resource sharing functionality, the Security plugin settings are:

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `plugins.security.experimental.resource_sharing.enabled` | Enable resource sharing | `false` |
| `plugins.security.experimental.resource_sharing.protected_types` | Resource types with access control | `[]` |

### Usage Example

#### Implementing DocRequest in a Plugin

```java
/**
 * Request to get a report definition - implements DocRequest for resource sharing
 */
public class GetReportDefinitionRequest extends ActionRequest implements DocRequest {
    private final String index;
    private final String reportId;
    
    public GetReportDefinitionRequest(String index, String reportId) {
        this.index = index;
        this.reportId = reportId;
    }
    
    @Override
    public String index() {
        return index;
    }
    
    @Override
    public String id() {
        return reportId;
    }
    
    @Override
    public String type() {
        return "report_definition";
    }
    
    @Override
    public ActionRequestValidationException validate() {
        return null;
    }
}
```

#### Security Plugin Integration

When a plugin implements `DocRequest`, the Security plugin can automatically evaluate access:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant User
    participant Plugin as Resource Plugin
    participant SecFilter as Security Filter
    participant RAE as ResourceAccessEvaluator
    participant RSIDX as Sharing Index

    User->>Plugin: Request (e.g., GET /resource/{id})
    Plugin->>SecFilter: DocRequest
    SecFilter->>RAE: Evaluate (user, action, DocRequest)
    RAE->>RSIDX: Fetch sharing doc by resource_id
    RSIDX-->>RAE: share_with + created_by
    RAE->>RAE: Check access level
    alt Allowed
        RAE-->>SecFilter: ALLOW
        SecFilter-->>Plugin: Proceed
        Plugin-->>User: 200 OK
    else Denied
        RAE-->>SecFilter: DENY
        SecFilter-->>User: 403 Forbidden
    end
```

## Limitations

- Only applicable to single-document operations
- Resource sharing requires Security plugin with experimental feature enabled
- The `type()` method must be overridden for custom resource types
- Bulk operations are not directly supported (individual items in bulk use `DocWriteRequest`)

## Change History

- **v3.3.0** (2026-01-10): Added `type()` method to DocRequest interface for resource sharing; Anomaly Detection plugin implements resource types for detectors and forecasters
- **v3.1.0** (2025-05-15): Initial implementation - introduced `DocRequest` interface, updated `DocWriteRequest` to extend it, and made `GetRequest` implement it

## References

### Blog Posts
- [Blog: Introducing resource sharing](https://opensearch.org/blog/introducing-resource-sharing-a-new-access-control-model-for-opensearch/): A new access control model for OpenSearch

### Pull Requests
| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v3.3.0 | [opensearch#19313](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/19313) | Add new extensible method to DocRequest to specify type |
| v3.3.0 | [anomaly-detection#1566](https://github.com/opensearch-project/anomaly-detection/pull/1566) | Adds resource types to DocRequests in Anomaly Detection |
| v3.1.0 | [#18269](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18269) | Create generic DocRequest to better categorize ActionRequests |

### Issues (Design / RFC)
- [Issue #4500](https://github.com/opensearch-project/security/issues/4500): Resource Permissions and Sharing (Security plugin)
