docs/features/opensearch/opensearch-multi-search-api.md, before:

---
tags:
  - opensearch
---
# Multi-Search API

## Summary

The Multi-Search API allows executing multiple search requests in a single API call, improving efficiency when running batch queries. OpenSearch provides two variants: the standard Multi-Search API (`_msearch`) and the Multi-Search Template API (`_msearch/template`) for parameterized searches using stored templates.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph Client
        REQ[Multi-Search Request]
    end
    subgraph OpenSearch
        COORD[Coordinating Node]
        subgraph "Search Execution"
            MS[Multi-Search Handler]
            MST[Multi-Search Template Handler]
            TE[Template Engine]
        end
        subgraph "Data Nodes"
            S1[Shard 1]
            S2[Shard 2]
            S3[Shard N]
        end
    end
    REQ --> COORD
    COORD --> MS
    COORD --> MST
    MST --> TE
    TE --> MS
    MS --> S1
    MS --> S2
    MS --> S3
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    A[Client Request] --> B{API Type}
    B -->|_msearch| C[Parse Search Bodies]
    B -->|_msearch/template| D[Render Templates]
    D --> C
    C --> E[Execute Searches in Parallel]
    E --> F[Aggregate Results]
    F --> G[Return Response with Status Codes]
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `MultiSearchRequest` | Holds multiple search requests |
| `MultiSearchResponse` | Contains array of search responses with status codes |
| `MultiSearchTemplateRequest` | Holds multiple template-based search requests |
| `MultiSearchTemplateResponse` | Contains array of template search responses with status codes |
| `SearchTemplateResponse` | Individual template search response |

### API Endpoints

| Endpoint | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `GET/POST /_msearch` | Execute multiple search requests |
| `GET/POST /{index}/_msearch` | Execute multiple searches against specific index |
| `GET/POST /_msearch/template` | Execute multiple search template requests |
| `GET/POST /{index}/_msearch/template` | Execute multiple template searches against specific index |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `max_concurrent_searches` | Maximum concurrent searches per request | Node count dependent |
| `max_concurrent_shard_requests` | Maximum concurrent shard requests per node | 5 |
| `pre_filter_shard_size` | Pre-filter shard size threshold | 128 |
| `rest_total_hits_as_int` | Return hits.total as integer | false |

### Usage Example

#### Multi-Search Request

```json
GET _msearch
{"index":"logs-*"}
{"query":{"match":{"message":"error"}}}
{"index":"metrics-*"}
{"query":{"range":{"@timestamp":{"gte":"now-1h"}}}}
```

#### Multi-Search Template Request

```json
GET _msearch/template
{"index":"products"}
{"id":"product_search","params":{"query":"laptop","size":10}}
{"index":"products"}
{"id":"product_search","params":{"query":"phone","size":5}}
```

#### Response Format

```json
{
  "took": 15,
  "responses": [
    {
      "took": 5,
      "timed_out": false,
      "_shards": {
        "total": 5,
        "successful": 5,
        "skipped": 0,
        "failed": 0
      },
      "hits": {
        "total": {"value": 100, "relation": "eq"},
        "max_score": 1.5,
        "hits": [...]
      },
      "status": 200
    },
    {
      "error": {
        "type": "index_not_found_exception",
        "reason": "no such index [unknown]"
      },
      "status": 404
    }
  ]
}
```

## Limitations

- Request body must use newline-delimited JSON format
- Each search is independent; no cross-search dependencies
- Large batch sizes may impact cluster performance

## Change History

- **v2.18.0** (2024-10-22): Added `status` field to Multi-Search Template API responses for consistency with Multi-Search API


## References

### Documentation
- [Multi-Search API Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/api-reference/multi-search/): Official multi-search docs
- [Multi-Search Template Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/api-reference/msearch-template/): Official template docs
- [Search Templates Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/api-reference/search-template/): Search template reference

### Pull Requests
| Version | PR | Description | Related Issue |
|---------|-----|-------------|---------------|
| v2.18.0 | [#16265](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/16265) | Fix multi-search with template doesn't return status code | [#11133](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/11133) |

### Issues (Design / RFC)
- [Issue #11133](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/11133): Bug report for missing status field

Commit message:

docs: add multi-search-request report for v2.19.0 (#2082)

docs/features/opensearch/opensearch-multi-search-api.md, after:

---
tags:
  - opensearch
---
# Multi-Search API

## Summary

The Multi-Search API allows executing multiple search requests in a single API call, improving efficiency when running batch queries. OpenSearch provides two variants: the standard Multi-Search API (`_msearch`) and the Multi-Search Template API (`_msearch/template`) for parameterized searches using stored templates.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph Client
        REQ[Multi-Search Request]
    end
    subgraph OpenSearch
        COORD[Coordinating Node]
        subgraph "Search Execution"
            MS[Multi-Search Handler]
            MST[Multi-Search Template Handler]
            TE[Template Engine]
        end
        subgraph "Data Nodes"
            S1[Shard 1]
            S2[Shard 2]
            S3[Shard N]
        end
    end
    REQ --> COORD
    COORD --> MS
    COORD --> MST
    MST --> TE
    TE --> MS
    MS --> S1
    MS --> S2
    MS --> S3
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    A[Client Request] --> B{API Type}
    B -->|_msearch| C[Parse Search Bodies]
    B -->|_msearch/template| D[Render Templates]
    D --> C
    C --> E[Execute Searches in Parallel]
    E --> F[Aggregate Results]
    F --> G[Return Response with Status Codes]
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `MultiSearchRequest` | Holds multiple search requests |
| `MultiSearchResponse` | Contains array of search responses with status codes |
| `MultiSearchTemplateRequest` | Holds multiple template-based search requests |
| `MultiSearchTemplateResponse` | Contains array of template search responses with status codes |
| `SearchTemplateResponse` | Individual template search response |

### API Endpoints

| Endpoint | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `GET/POST /_msearch` | Execute multiple search requests |
| `GET/POST /{index}/_msearch` | Execute multiple searches against specific index |
| `GET/POST /_msearch/template` | Execute multiple search template requests |
| `GET/POST /{index}/_msearch/template` | Execute multiple template searches against specific index |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `max_concurrent_searches` | Maximum concurrent searches per request | Node count dependent |
| `max_concurrent_shard_requests` | Maximum concurrent shard requests per node | 5 |
| `pre_filter_shard_size` | Pre-filter shard size threshold | 128 |
| `rest_total_hits_as_int` | Return hits.total as integer | false |

### Usage Example

#### Multi-Search Request

```json
GET _msearch
{"index":"logs-*"}
{"query":{"match":{"message":"error"}}}
{"index":"metrics-*"}
{"query":{"range":{"@timestamp":{"gte":"now-1h"}}}}
```

#### Multi-Search Template Request

```json
GET _msearch/template
{"index":"products"}
{"id":"product_search","params":{"query":"laptop","size":10}}
{"index":"products"}
{"id":"product_search","params":{"query":"phone","size":5}}
```

#### Response Format

```json
{
  "took": 15,
  "responses": [
    {
      "took": 5,
      "timed_out": false,
      "_shards": {
        "total": 5,
        "successful": 5,
        "skipped": 0,
        "failed": 0
      },
      "hits": {
        "total": {"value": 100, "relation": "eq"},
        "max_score": 1.5,
        "hits": [...]
      },
      "status": 200
    },
    {
      "error": {
        "type": "index_not_found_exception",
        "reason": "no such index [unknown]"
      },
      "status": 404
    }
  ]
}
```

## Limitations

- Request body must use newline-delimited JSON format
- Each search is independent; no cross-search dependencies
- Large batch sizes may impact cluster performance

## Change History

- **v2.19.0** (2025-02-18): Fixed task cancellation handling - queued search requests are now properly stopped when the parent `_msearch` task is cancelled
- **v2.18.0** (2024-10-22): Added `status` field to Multi-Search Template API responses for consistency with Multi-Search API


## References

### Documentation
- [Multi-Search API Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/api-reference/multi-search/): Official multi-search docs
- [Multi-Search Template Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/api-reference/msearch-template/): Official template docs
- [Search Templates Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/api-reference/search-template/): Search template reference

### Pull Requests
| Version | PR | Description | Related Issue |
|---------|-----|-------------|---------------|
| v2.19.0 | [#17005](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/17005) | Fix task cancellation handling for _msearch API | [#17004](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/17004) |
| v2.18.0 | [#16265](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/16265) | Fix multi-search with template doesn't return status code | [#11133](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/11133) |

### Issues (Design / RFC)
- [Issue #11133](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/11133): Bug report for missing status field
