docs/features/opensearch/opensearch-lucene-upgrade.md, before:

---
tags:
  - opensearch
---
# Lucene Upgrade

## Summary

OpenSearch relies on Apache Lucene as its core search library. Lucene upgrades bring performance improvements, new features, bug fixes, and security enhancements to OpenSearch. These upgrades are essential for maintaining compatibility with the latest search capabilities and ensuring optimal performance.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph OpenSearch
        OS[OpenSearch Core]
        Codec[Codec Layer]
        Index[Index Management]
    end
    
    subgraph Lucene
        LC[Lucene Core]
        PF[Postings Format]
        DV[Doc Values]
        KNN[KNN Vectors]
        Analysis[Analysis]
    end
    
    OS --> Codec
    Codec --> LC
    Index --> LC
    LC --> PF
    LC --> DV
    LC --> KNN
    LC --> Analysis
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| Lucene Core | Core search library providing indexing and search capabilities |
| Postings Format | Encodes term frequencies, positions, and skip data |
| Doc Values | Column-oriented storage for sorting and aggregations |
| KNN Vectors | Vector similarity search support |
| Analysis | Text analysis and tokenization |

### Configuration

No specific configuration is required for Lucene upgrades. The version is managed at the OpenSearch build level.

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| N/A | Lucene version is bundled with OpenSearch | Determined by OpenSearch version |

### Usage Example

Lucene version can be verified through the nodes info API:

```bash
GET /_nodes?filter_path=nodes.*.version
```

## Limitations

- Lucene upgrades may require index format changes
- Major Lucene version upgrades may require reindexing
- Some Lucene features may not be exposed through OpenSearch APIs

## Change History

- **v3.4.0**: Upgrade to Apache Lucene 10.3.2. Bug fix release addressing potential EOF exception in MaxScoreBulkScorer during optimized filter iterations (GITHUB#15380).
- **v3.3.0**: Upgrade to Apache Lucene 10.3.0. New KNN1030Codec for k-NN plugin, Lucene103 codecs for custom-codecs plugin. API changes include new `AcceptDocs` interface replacing `Bits` in vector search, and `IOContext` hints for optimized file access.
- **v3.3.0**: Migrate deprecated `Operations#union(Automaton, Automaton)` usages to `Operations#union(Collection<Automaton>)` in AutomatonQueries, XContentMapValues, and SystemIndices classes.
- **v3.1.0**: Upgrade to Apache Lucene 10.2.1 with SeededKnnVectorQuery, binary quantized vector codecs, TopDocs#rrf, and API changes (DisiPriorityQueue, TopScoreDocCollectorManager). Plugin updates: neural-search hybrid query refactoring, learning-to-rank RankerQuery fix.
- **v3.0.0**: Upgrade to Apache Lucene 10
- **v2.18.0**: Upgrade to Apache Lucene 9.12.0 with new Lucene912PostingsFormat, JDK 23 Panama Vectorization support, dynamic range facets, and various performance optimizations


## References

### Documentation
- [OpenSearch Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/): OpenSearch official documentation
- [Lucene 10.3.2 Release](https://github.com/apache/lucene/releases/tag/releases%2Flucene%2F10.3.2): Official Lucene 10.3.2 release
- [Lucene 10.3.0 Changelog](https://lucene.apache.org/core/10_3_0/changes/Changes.html): Official Lucene 10.3.0 release notes
- [Lucene 10.2.1 Changelog](https://lucene.apache.org/core/10_2_1/changes/Changes.html): Official Lucene 10.2.1 release notes
- [Lucene 10.2.0 Changelog](https://lucene.apache.org/core/10_2_0/changes/Changes.html): Official Lucene 10.2.0 release notes
- [Lucene 9.12.0 Changelog](https://lucene.apache.org/core/9_12_0/changes/Changes.html): Official Lucene 9.12.0 release notes
- [Apache Lucene](https://lucene.apache.org/): Official Apache Lucene project

### Pull Requests
| Version | PR | Description | Related Issue |
|---------|-----|-------------|---------------|
| v3.4.0 | [#20026](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/20026) | Bump Apache Lucene from 10.3.1 to 10.3.2 |   |
| v3.3.0 | [#19296](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/19296) | Bump Apache Lucene from 10.2.2 to 10.3.0 | [#18638](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/18638) |
| v3.3.0 | [k-NN#2878](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2878) | Fix KNN build due to Lucene 10.3 upgrade | [#2876](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2876) |
| v3.3.0 | [custom-codecs#277](https://github.com/opensearch-project/custom-codecs/pull/277) | Update for Lucene 10.3 | [#276](https://github.com/opensearch-project/custom-codecs/issues/276) |
| v3.3.0 | [#19397](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/19397) | Migrate deprecated usages of Operations#union |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#17961](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/17961) | Upgrade to Lucene 10.2.1 |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#18395](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18395) | Replace deprecated TopScoreDocCollectorManager construction | [#18394](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/18394) |
| v3.1.0 | [neural-search#1336](https://github.com/opensearch-project/neural-search/pull/1336) | Update Lucene dependencies for hybrid query | [#1334](https://github.com/opensearch-project/neural-search/issues/1334) |
| v3.1.0 | [learning-to-rank-base#186](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-learning-to-rank-base/pull/186) | Lucene 10.2 upgrade changes for RankerQuery | [#184](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-learning-to-rank-base/issues/184) |
| v3.0.0 | [#16366](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/16366) | Apache Lucene 10 update | [#11415](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/11415) |
| v2.18.0 | [#15333](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/15333) | Update Apache Lucene to 9.12.0 |   |

### Issues (Design / RFC)
- [Issue #1334](https://github.com/opensearch-project/neural-search/issues/1334): Neural-search build failure due to Lucene API changes
- [Issue #184](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-learning-to-rank-base/issues/184): Learning to Rank build failure due to DisiPriorityQueue being abstract

Commit message:

docs: add lucene-upgrade report for v2.16.0

docs/features/opensearch/opensearch-lucene-upgrade.md, after:

---
tags:
  - opensearch
---
# Lucene Upgrade

## Summary

OpenSearch relies on Apache Lucene as its core search library. Lucene upgrades bring performance improvements, new features, bug fixes, and security enhancements to OpenSearch. These upgrades are essential for maintaining compatibility with the latest search capabilities and ensuring optimal performance.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph OpenSearch
        OS[OpenSearch Core]
        Codec[Codec Layer]
        Index[Index Management]
    end
    
    subgraph Lucene
        LC[Lucene Core]
        PF[Postings Format]
        DV[Doc Values]
        KNN[KNN Vectors]
        Analysis[Analysis]
    end
    
    OS --> Codec
    Codec --> LC
    Index --> LC
    LC --> PF
    LC --> DV
    LC --> KNN
    LC --> Analysis
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| Lucene Core | Core search library providing indexing and search capabilities |
| Postings Format | Encodes term frequencies, positions, and skip data |
| Doc Values | Column-oriented storage for sorting and aggregations |
| KNN Vectors | Vector similarity search support |
| Analysis | Text analysis and tokenization |

### Configuration

No specific configuration is required for Lucene upgrades. The version is managed at the OpenSearch build level.

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| N/A | Lucene version is bundled with OpenSearch | Determined by OpenSearch version |

### Usage Example

Lucene version can be verified through the nodes info API:

```bash
GET /_nodes?filter_path=nodes.*.version
```

## Limitations

- Lucene upgrades may require index format changes
- Major Lucene version upgrades may require reindexing
- Some Lucene features may not be exposed through OpenSearch APIs

## Change History

- **v3.4.0**: Upgrade to Apache Lucene 10.3.2. Bug fix release addressing potential EOF exception in MaxScoreBulkScorer during optimized filter iterations (GITHUB#15380).
- **v3.3.0**: Upgrade to Apache Lucene 10.3.0. New KNN1030Codec for k-NN plugin, Lucene103 codecs for custom-codecs plugin. API changes include new `AcceptDocs` interface replacing `Bits` in vector search, and `IOContext` hints for optimized file access.
- **v3.3.0**: Migrate deprecated `Operations#union(Automaton, Automaton)` usages to `Operations#union(Collection<Automaton>)` in AutomatonQueries, XContentMapValues, and SystemIndices classes.
- **v3.1.0**: Upgrade to Apache Lucene 10.2.1 with SeededKnnVectorQuery, binary quantized vector codecs, TopDocs#rrf, and API changes (DisiPriorityQueue, TopScoreDocCollectorManager). Plugin updates: neural-search hybrid query refactoring, learning-to-rank RankerQuery fix.
- **v3.0.0**: Upgrade to Apache Lucene 10
- **v2.18.0**: Upgrade to Apache Lucene 9.12.0 with new Lucene912PostingsFormat, JDK 23 Panama Vectorization support, dynamic range facets, and various performance optimizations
- **v2.16.0**: Upgrade to Apache Lucene 9.11.0 (stable release from snapshot). Includes posix_madvise support for MMapDirectory, 4-bit HNSW vectors with compression, intra-merge parallelism, RWLock for LRUQueryCache, MemorySegment Vector scorer (~2x latency improvement for byte vectors), and ICU4J 74.2 upgrade.
- **v3.3.0**: Upgrade to Apache Lucene 10.3.0. New KNN1030Codec for k-NN plugin, Lucene103 codecs for custom-codecs plugin. API changes include new `AcceptDocs` interface replacing `Bits` in vector search, and `IOContext` hints for optimized file access.
- **v3.3.0**: Migrate deprecated `Operations#union(Automaton, Automaton)` usages to `Operations#union(Collection<Automaton>)` in AutomatonQueries, XContentMapValues, and SystemIndices classes.
- **v3.1.0**: Upgrade to Apache Lucene 10.2.1 with SeededKnnVectorQuery, binary quantized vector codecs, TopDocs#rrf, and API changes (DisiPriorityQueue, TopScoreDocCollectorManager). Plugin updates: neural-search hybrid query refactoring, learning-to-rank RankerQuery fix.
- **v3.0.0**: Upgrade to Apache Lucene 10
- **v2.18.0**: Upgrade to Apache Lucene 9.12.0 with new Lucene912PostingsFormat, JDK 23 Panama Vectorization support, dynamic range facets, and various performance optimizations


## References

### Documentation
- [OpenSearch Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/): OpenSearch official documentation
- [Lucene 10.3.2 Release](https://github.com/apache/lucene/releases/tag/releases%2Flucene%2F10.3.2): Official Lucene 10.3.2 release
- [Lucene 10.3.0 Changelog](https://lucene.apache.org/core/10_3_0/changes/Changes.html): Official Lucene 10.3.0 release notes
- [Lucene 10.2.1 Changelog](https://lucene.apache.org/core/10_2_1/changes/Changes.html): Official Lucene 10.2.1 release notes
- [Lucene 10.2.0 Changelog](https://lucene.apache.org/core/10_2_0/changes/Changes.html): Official Lucene 10.2.0 release notes
- [Lucene 9.12.0 Changelog](https://lucene.apache.org/core/9_12_0/changes/Changes.html): Official Lucene 9.12.0 release notes
- [Apache Lucene](https://lucene.apache.org/): Official Apache Lucene project

### Pull Requests
| Version | PR | Description | Related Issue |
|---------|-----|-------------|---------------|
| v3.4.0 | [#20026](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/20026) | Bump Apache Lucene from 10.3.1 to 10.3.2 |   |
| v3.3.0 | [#19296](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/19296) | Bump Apache Lucene from 10.2.2 to 10.3.0 | [#18638](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/18638) |
| v3.3.0 | [k-NN#2878](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2878) | Fix KNN build due to Lucene 10.3 upgrade | [#2876](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2876) |
| v3.3.0 | [custom-codecs#277](https://github.com/opensearch-project/custom-codecs/pull/277) | Update for Lucene 10.3 | [#276](https://github.com/opensearch-project/custom-codecs/issues/276) |
| v3.3.0 | [#19397](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/19397) | Migrate deprecated usages of Operations#union |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#17961](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/17961) | Upgrade to Lucene 10.2.1 |   |
| v3.1.0 | [#18395](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18395) | Replace deprecated TopScoreDocCollectorManager construction | [#18394](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/18394) |
| v3.1.0 | [neural-search#1336](https://github.com/opensearch-project/neural-search/pull/1336) | Update Lucene dependencies for hybrid query | [#1334](https://github.com/opensearch-project/neural-search/issues/1334) |
| v3.1.0 | [learning-to-rank-base#186](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-learning-to-rank-base/pull/186) | Lucene 10.2 upgrade changes for RankerQuery | [#184](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-learning-to-rank-base/issues/184) |
| v3.0.0 | [#16366](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/16366) | Apache Lucene 10 update | [#11415](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/11415) |
| v2.18.0 | [#15333](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/15333) | Update Apache Lucene to 9.12.0 |   |
| v2.16.0 | [#14042](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/14042) | Update to Apache Lucene 9.11.0 |   |

### Issues (Design / RFC)
- [Issue #1334](https://github.com/opensearch-project/neural-search/issues/1334): Neural-search build failure due to Lucene API changes
- [Issue #184](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-learning-to-rank-base/issues/184): Learning to Rank build failure due to DisiPriorityQueue being abstract
