docs/features/opensearch/opensearch-derived-fields.md, before:

---
tags:
  - opensearch
---
# Derived Fields

## Summary

Derived fields allow you to create new fields dynamically by executing scripts on existing fields at query time. The source data can come from either the `_source` field or doc values. Once defined in an index mapping or search request, derived fields can be queried like regular fields, enabling real-time data transformation without reindexing.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Query Time Processing"
        Q[Search Query] --> DFQ[DerivedFieldQuery]
        DFQ --> VF[ValueFetcher]
        VF --> SRC[_source / doc_values]
        SRC --> Script[Painless Script]
        Script --> MI[MemoryIndex]
        MI --> LQ[Lucene Query Execution]
        LQ --> Results[Search Results]
    end
    
    subgraph "Index Mapping"
        IM[Index Mapping] --> DF[Derived Field Definition]
        DF --> Type[Field Type]
        DF --> Scr[Script]
        DF --> Opt[Optional: format, prefilter_field]
    end
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    A[Document] --> B[_source / doc_values]
    B --> C[DerivedFieldValueFetcher]
    C --> D[Execute Script]
    D --> E[emit values]
    E --> F[IndexableField]
    F --> G[MemoryIndex]
    G --> H[Query Execution]
    H --> I[Match Result]
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `DerivedFieldQuery` | Wraps a Lucene query to execute against derived field values |
| `DerivedFieldValueFetcher` | Retrieves source values and executes scripts to produce derived values |
| `DerivedFieldScript` | Painless script context for derived field computation |
| `MemoryIndex` | In-memory Lucene index used to execute queries against derived values |

### Supported Field Types

| Type | Emit Format | Multi-valued |
|------|-------------|--------------|
| `boolean` | `emit(boolean)` | No |
| `date` | `emit(long timeInMillis)` | Yes |
| `double` | `emit(double)` | Yes |
| `float` | `emit(float)` | Yes |
| `geo_point` | `emit(double lat, double lon)` | Yes |
| `ip` | `emit(String ip)` | Yes |
| `keyword` | `emit(String)` | Yes |
| `long` | `emit(long)` | Yes |
| `object` | `emit(String json)` | Yes |
| `text` | `emit(String)` | Yes |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `index.query.derived_field.enabled` | Enable/disable derived fields at index level | `true` |
| `search.derived_field.enabled` | Enable/disable derived fields at cluster level | `true` |
| `search.allow_expensive_queries` | Must be `true` for derived fields to work | `true` |

### Usage Example

Define a derived field in index mapping:

```json
PUT /logs/_mapping
{
  "derived": {
    "method": {
      "type": "keyword",
      "script": {
        "source": "emit(doc['request.keyword'].value.splitOnToken(' ')[1])"
      }
    },
    "timestamp": {
      "type": "date",
      "format": "epoch_millis",
      "script": {
        "source": "emit(Long.parseLong(doc['request.keyword'].value.splitOnToken(' ')[0]))"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Query the derived field:

```json
POST /logs/_search
{
  "query": {
    "bool": {
      "must": [
        { "term": { "method": "GET" } },
        { "range": { "timestamp": { "gte": "now-1d" } } }
      ]
    }
  },
  "fields": ["method", "timestamp"]
}
```

### Performance Optimization

Use `prefilter_field` to prune the search space:

```json
PUT /logs/_mapping
{
  "derived": {
    "method": {
      "type": "keyword",
      "script": {
        "source": "emit(doc['request.keyword'].value.splitOnToken(' ')[1])"
      },
      "prefilter_field": "request"
    }
  }
}
```

## Limitations

- **Scoring and sorting**: Not yet supported on derived fields
- **Aggregations**: Most types supported since v2.17; geographic, significant terms/text, and scripted metric aggregations not supported
- **Dashboard support**: Fields not displayed in available fields list (can still filter by name)
- **Chained derived fields**: One derived field cannot reference another
- **Join field type**: Derived fields not supported for join fields
- **Performance**: Computed at query time, may impact performance on large datasets

## Change History

- **v3.3.0**: Fixed query rewrite for range queries on derived fields by implementing selective rewrite based on query type
- **v2.17.0**: Added support for most aggregation types on derived fields
- **v2.15.0**: Initial implementation of derived fields feature


## References

### Documentation
- [Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/field-types/supported-field-types/derived/): Official derived field documentation

### Pull Requests
| Version | PR | Description | Related Issue |
|---------|-----|-------------|---------------|
| v3.3.0 | [#19496](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/19496) | Fix derived field rewrite to handle range queries | [#19337](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/19337) |
| v2.17.0 | - | Added aggregation support for derived fields |   |
| v2.15.0 | - | Initial implementation of derived fields |   |

### Issues (Design / RFC)
- [Issue #19337](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/19337): Bug report for derived field rewrite issues with range queries

Commit message:

docs: add derived-fields report for v2.16.0 (#2437)

docs/features/opensearch/opensearch-derived-fields.md, after:

---
tags:
  - opensearch
---
# Derived Fields

## Summary

Derived fields allow you to create new fields dynamically by executing scripts on existing fields at query time. The source data can come from either the `_source` field or doc values. Once defined in an index mapping or search request, derived fields can be queried like regular fields, enabling real-time data transformation without reindexing.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Query Time Processing"
        Q[Search Query] --> DFQ[DerivedFieldQuery]
        DFQ --> VF[ValueFetcher]
        VF --> SRC[_source / doc_values]
        SRC --> Script[Painless Script]
        Script --> MI[MemoryIndex]
        MI --> LQ[Lucene Query Execution]
        LQ --> Results[Search Results]
    end
    
    subgraph "Index Mapping"
        IM[Index Mapping] --> DF[Derived Field Definition]
        DF --> Type[Field Type]
        DF --> Scr[Script]
        DF --> Opt[Optional: format, prefilter_field]
    end
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    A[Document] --> B[_source / doc_values]
    B --> C[DerivedFieldValueFetcher]
    C --> D[Execute Script]
    D --> E[emit values]
    E --> F[IndexableField]
    F --> G[MemoryIndex]
    G --> H[Query Execution]
    H --> I[Match Result]
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `DerivedFieldQuery` | Wraps a Lucene query to execute against derived field values |
| `DerivedFieldValueFetcher` | Retrieves source values and executes scripts to produce derived values |
| `DerivedFieldScript` | Painless script context for derived field computation |
| `MemoryIndex` | In-memory Lucene index used to execute queries against derived values |

### Supported Field Types

| Type | Emit Format | Multi-valued |
|------|-------------|--------------|
| `boolean` | `emit(boolean)` | No |
| `date` | `emit(long timeInMillis)` | Yes |
| `double` | `emit(double)` | Yes |
| `float` | `emit(float)` | Yes |
| `geo_point` | `emit(double lat, double lon)` | Yes |
| `ip` | `emit(String ip)` | Yes |
| `keyword` | `emit(String)` | Yes |
| `long` | `emit(long)` | Yes |
| `object` | `emit(String json)` | Yes |
| `text` | `emit(String)` | Yes |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `index.query.derived_field.enabled` | Enable/disable derived fields at index level | `true` |
| `search.derived_field.enabled` | Enable/disable derived fields at cluster level | `true` |
| `search.allow_expensive_queries` | Must be `true` for derived fields to work | `true` |

### Usage Example

Define a derived field in index mapping:

```json
PUT /logs/_mapping
{
  "derived": {
    "method": {
      "type": "keyword",
      "script": {
        "source": "emit(doc['request.keyword'].value.splitOnToken(' ')[1])"
      }
    },
    "timestamp": {
      "type": "date",
      "format": "epoch_millis",
      "script": {
        "source": "emit(Long.parseLong(doc['request.keyword'].value.splitOnToken(' ')[0]))"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Query the derived field:

```json
POST /logs/_search
{
  "query": {
    "bool": {
      "must": [
        { "term": { "method": "GET" } },
        { "range": { "timestamp": { "gte": "now-1d" } } }
      ]
    }
  },
  "fields": ["method", "timestamp"]
}
```

### Performance Optimization

Use `prefilter_field` to prune the search space:

```json
PUT /logs/_mapping
{
  "derived": {
    "method": {
      "type": "keyword",
      "script": {
        "source": "emit(doc['request.keyword'].value.splitOnToken(' ')[1])"
      },
      "prefilter_field": "request"
    }
  }
}
```

## Limitations

- **Scoring and sorting**: Not yet supported on derived fields
- **Aggregations**: Most types supported since v2.17; geographic, significant terms/text, and scripted metric aggregations not supported
- **Dashboard support**: Fields not displayed in available fields list (can still filter by name)
- **Chained derived fields**: One derived field cannot reference another
- **Join field type**: Derived fields not supported for join fields
- **Performance**: Computed at query time, may impact performance on large datasets

## Change History

- **v3.3.0**: Fixed query rewrite for range queries on derived fields by implementing selective rewrite based on query type
- **v2.17.0**: Added support for most aggregation types on derived fields
- **v2.16.0**: Fixed race condition in derived field parsing when defined in search requests
- **v2.15.0**: Initial implementation of derived fields feature


## References

### Documentation
- [Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/field-types/supported-field-types/derived/): Official derived field documentation

### Pull Requests
| Version | PR | Description | Related Issue |
|---------|-----|-------------|---------------|
| v3.3.0 | [#19496](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/19496) | Fix derived field rewrite to handle range queries | [#19337](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/19337) |
| v2.17.0 | - | Added aggregation support for derived fields |   |
| v2.16.0 | [#14445](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/14445) | Fix race condition in derived field parsing from search requests | [#14444](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/14444) |
| v2.15.0 | - | Initial implementation of derived fields |   |

### Issues (Design / RFC)
- [Issue #19337](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/19337): Bug report for derived field rewrite issues with range queries
