docs/features/opensearch/profiler.md, before:

# Query Profiler

## Summary

The Query Profiler (Profile API) provides detailed timing information about the execution of individual components of a search request. It helps debug slow queries and understand how to improve search performance by breaking down query execution into measurable components.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Search Request"
        SR[Search Request with profile=true]
    end
    
    subgraph "Query Execution"
        QE[Query Execution]
        CW[Create Weight]
        BS[Build Scorer]
        SC[Score Documents]
        CO[Collectors]
    end
    
    subgraph "Profiling Layer"
        QPB[QueryProfileBreakdown]
        CQPB[ConcurrentQueryProfileBreakdown]
        PT[Profile Timers]
    end
    
    subgraph "Output"
        PR[Profile Results]
        BD[Breakdown Map]
        CT[Collector Times]
        AT[Aggregation Times]
    end
    
    SR --> QE
    QE --> CW
    CW --> BS
    BS --> SC
    SC --> CO
    
    QE --> QPB
    QE --> CQPB
    QPB --> PT
    CQPB --> PT
    
    PT --> PR
    PR --> BD
    PR --> CT
    PR --> AT
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph Input
        Q[Query with profile:true]
    end
    
    subgraph Execution
        W[Weight Creation]
        S[Scorer Building]
        D[Document Scoring]
        C[Collection]
    end
    
    subgraph Timing
        T1[create_weight]
        T2[build_scorer]
        T3[next_doc/advance]
        T4[score]
    end
    
    subgraph Output
        R[Profile Response]
    end
    
    Q --> W --> S --> D --> C
    W --> T1
    S --> T2
    D --> T3
    D --> T4
    T1 & T2 & T3 & T4 --> R
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `QueryProfileBreakdown` | Tracks timing for non-concurrent query execution |
| `ConcurrentQueryProfileBreakdown` | Tracks timing for concurrent segment search with slice-level statistics |
| `ProfileTimer` | Low-level timer for measuring individual operations |
| `ProfileCollector` | Wraps collectors to measure collection time |

### Configuration

The Profile API is enabled per-request using the `profile` parameter:

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `profile` | Enable profiling for the request | `false` |
| `human` | Return human-readable time values | `false` |

### Usage Example

```json
GET /myindex/_search
{
  "profile": true,
  "query": {
    "match": { "title": "opensearch" }
  }
}
```

Response includes breakdown timing:

```json
{
  "profile": {
    "shards": [{
      "searches": [{
        "query": [{
          "type": "TermQuery",
          "description": "title:opensearch",
          "time_in_nanos": 123456,
          "breakdown": {
            "create_weight": 10000,
            "create_weight_count": 1,
            "build_scorer": 50000,
            "build_scorer_count": 2,
            "next_doc": 30000,
            "next_doc_count": 100,
            "score": 20000,
            "score_count": 100
          }
        }]
      }]
    }]
  }
}
```

### Concurrent Segment Search Support

When concurrent segment search is enabled, the profiler provides additional slice-level statistics:

| Field | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `max_slice_time_in_nanos` | Maximum time across all slices |
| `min_slice_time_in_nanos` | Minimum time across all slices |
| `avg_slice_time_in_nanos` | Average time across all slices |
| `slice_count` | Number of slices executed |

## Limitations

- Profiling adds overhead to search operations
- Does not measure network latency
- Does not measure fetch phase time
- Does not measure queue wait time

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v3.2.0 | [#18540](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18540) | Fix concurrent timings in profiler |

## References

- [Profile API Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/api-reference/search-apis/profile/): Official API reference
- [Concurrent Segment Search](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/search-plugins/concurrent-segment-search/): Related feature

## Change History

- **v3.2.0** (2025-06-21): Fixed incorrect timing values for concurrent segment search when timers have zero invocations

Commit message:

docs: add plugin profiling report for v3.2.0 (#1216)

docs/features/opensearch/profiler.md, after:

# Query Profiler

## Summary

The Query Profiler (Profile API) provides detailed timing information about the execution of individual components of a search request. It helps debug slow queries and understand how to improve search performance by breaking down query execution into measurable components. Starting in v3.2.0, plugins can contribute custom profiling metrics and fetch phase profiling works across multi-shard queries.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Search Request"
        SR[Search Request with profile=true]
    end
    
    subgraph "Query Execution"
        QE[Query Execution]
        CW[Create Weight]
        BS[Build Scorer]
        SC[Score Documents]
        CO[Collectors]
    end
    
    subgraph "Profiling Layer"
        QPB[QueryProfileBreakdown]
        CQPB[ConcurrentQueryProfileBreakdown]
        PP[Plugin Profilers]
        PT[Profile Timers]
    end
    
    subgraph "Fetch Phase"
        FP[Fetch Profiler]
        FSR[FetchSearchResult]
    end
    
    subgraph "Coordinator"
        SPC[SearchPhaseController]
        MFP[mergeFetchProfiles]
    end
    
    subgraph "Output"
        PR[Profile Results]
        BD[Breakdown Map]
        CT[Collector Times]
        AT[Aggregation Times]
        FT[Fetch Times]
    end
    
    SR --> QE
    QE --> CW
    CW --> BS
    BS --> SC
    SC --> CO
    
    QE --> QPB
    QE --> CQPB
    PP --> QPB
    QPB --> PT
    CQPB --> PT
    
    SR --> FP
    FP --> FSR
    FSR --> SPC
    SPC --> MFP
    
    PT --> PR
    MFP --> PR
    PR --> BD
    PR --> CT
    PR --> AT
    PR --> FT
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph Input
        Q[Query with profile:true]
    end
    
    subgraph Execution
        W[Weight Creation]
        S[Scorer Building]
        D[Document Scoring]
        C[Collection]
    end
    
    subgraph Timing
        T1[create_weight]
        T2[build_scorer]
        T3[next_doc/advance]
        T4[score]
    end
    
    subgraph Output
        R[Profile Response]
    end
    
    Q --> W --> S --> D --> C
    W --> T1
    S --> T2
    D --> T3
    D --> T4
    T1 & T2 & T3 & T4 --> R
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `QueryProfileBreakdown` | Tracks timing for non-concurrent query execution |
| `ConcurrentQueryProfileBreakdown` | Tracks timing for concurrent segment search with slice-level statistics |
| `ProfileTimer` | Low-level timer for measuring individual operations |
| `ProfileCollector` | Wraps collectors to measure collection time |
| `SearchPlugin.ProfileMetricsProvider` | Interface for plugins to provide custom profile metrics (v3.2.0+) |
| `SearchPhaseController.mergeFetchProfiles()` | Merges fetch phase profiles with query phase profiles (v3.2.0+) |

### Configuration

The Profile API is enabled per-request using the `profile` parameter:

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `profile` | Enable profiling for the request | `false` |
| `human` | Return human-readable time values | `false` |

### Usage Example

```json
GET /myindex/_search
{
  "profile": true,
  "query": {
    "match": { "title": "opensearch" }
  }
}
```

Response includes breakdown timing:

```json
{
  "profile": {
    "shards": [{
      "searches": [{
        "query": [{
          "type": "TermQuery",
          "description": "title:opensearch",
          "time_in_nanos": 123456,
          "breakdown": {
            "create_weight": 10000,
            "create_weight_count": 1,
            "build_scorer": 50000,
            "build_scorer_count": 2,
            "next_doc": 30000,
            "next_doc_count": 100,
            "score": 20000,
            "score_count": 100
          }
        }]
      }]
    }]
  }
}
```

### Concurrent Segment Search Support

When concurrent segment search is enabled, the profiler provides additional slice-level statistics:

| Field | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `max_slice_time_in_nanos` | Maximum time across all slices |
| `min_slice_time_in_nanos` | Minimum time across all slices |
| `avg_slice_time_in_nanos` | Average time across all slices |
| `slice_count` | Number of slices executed |

## Limitations

- Profiling adds overhead to search operations
- Does not measure network latency
- Does not measure queue wait time
- Plugin metrics are only included in the query breakdown, not as separate sections (v3.2.0+)

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v3.2.0 | [#18656](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18656) | Extend profile capabilities to plugins |
| v3.2.0 | [#18887](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18887) | Expand fetch phase profiling to multi-shard queries |
| v3.2.0 | [#18540](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18540) | Fix concurrent timings in profiler |

## References

- [Profile API Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/api-reference/search-apis/profile/): Official API reference
- [Concurrent Segment Search](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/search-plugins/concurrent-segment-search/): Related feature
- [Issue #18460](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/18460): RFC for Profiling Extensibility

## Change History

- **v3.2.0** (2025-08-05): Added plugin profiling extensibility and multi-shard fetch phase profiling
- **v3.2.0** (2025-06-21): Fixed incorrect timing values for concurrent segment search when timers have zero invocations
