docs/features/opensearch/query-bug-fixes.md, before:

# Query Bug Fixes

## Summary

This feature tracks bug fixes and improvements to OpenSearch query handling, including exists queries, error responses, field validation, and field type support. These fixes improve query reliability, provide better error messages, and extend functionality for specific field types.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Query Processing"
        QP[Query Parser] --> QB[Query Builder]
        QB --> QR[Query Rewriter]
        QR --> LE[Lucene Execution]
    end
    
    subgraph "Error Handling"
        EH[ExceptionsHelper] --> RS[REST Status]
        RS --> |400| BR[Bad Request]
        RS --> |500| ISE[Internal Server Error]
    end
    
    subgraph "Field Types"
        FT[Field Type] --> EQ[Exists Query]
        FT --> TQ[Terms Query]
        FT --> DV[Doc Values]
    end
    
    QB --> EH
    QR --> FT
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| ExistsQueryBuilder | Builds exists queries for fields, handles object fields with subfields |
| QueryStringQueryBuilder | Parses query string syntax with field validation |
| IpFieldMapper | Handles IP field indexing and querying including CIDR notation |
| ExceptionsHelper | Maps exceptions to appropriate HTTP status codes |
| MatrixStatsAggregator | Computes matrix statistics across multiple fields |

### Configuration

No specific configuration required. These are core query processing improvements.

### Usage Example

```json
// Exists query on object field with derived subfields
PUT test
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "log": {
        "properties": {
          "request": { "type": "text" }
        }
      }
    },
    "derived": {
      "log.timestamp": {
        "type": "date",
        "script": { "source": "emit(params._source.log.request)" }
      }
    }
  }
}

POST test/_search
{
  "query": {
    "exists": { "field": "log" }
  }
}

// IP terms query with many CIDR ranges
POST test/_search
{
  "query": {
    "terms": {
      "client_ip": [
        "192.168.0.0/16",
        "10.0.0.0/8",
        "172.16.0.0/12"
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

## Limitations

- Derived fields do not support exists queries; they are silently skipped when querying parent object fields
- The IP field enhancement requires Lucene 10.2+ for `DocValuesMultiRangeQuery` support

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v3.1.0 | [#17843](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/17843) | Fix object field exists query |
| v3.1.0 | [#18161](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18161) | Use Bad Request status for InputCoercionException |
| v3.1.0 | [#18194](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18194) | Null check field names in QueryStringQueryBuilder |
| v3.1.0 | [#18357](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18357) | DocValues-only IP field supports terms_query with >1025 IP masks |
| v3.1.0 | [#18242](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18242) | Fix MatrixStatsAggregator reuse when mode parameter changes |

## References

- [Issue #17808](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/17808): Object Field exists query returns wrong result
- [Issue #18131](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/18131): XContent parsing exceptions return 500 status
- [Issue #17394](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/17394): Unlimit IP/masks terms query for doc_values only fields
- [Query string documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/query-dsl/full-text/query-string/)

## Change History

- **v3.1.0** (2026-01-10): Initial implementation with five bug fixes for query handling

Commit message:

docs: add query bugfixes report for v3.4.0

docs/features/opensearch/query-bug-fixes.md, after:

# Query Bug Fixes

## Summary

This feature tracks bug fixes and improvements to OpenSearch query handling, including exists queries, error responses, field validation, and field type support. These fixes improve query reliability, provide better error messages, and extend functionality for specific field types.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Query Processing"
        QP[Query Parser] --> QB[Query Builder]
        QB --> QR[Query Rewriter]
        QR --> LE[Lucene Execution]
    end
    
    subgraph "Error Handling"
        EH[ExceptionsHelper] --> RS[REST Status]
        RS --> |400| BR[Bad Request]
        RS --> |500| ISE[Internal Server Error]
    end
    
    subgraph "Field Types"
        FT[Field Type] --> EQ[Exists Query]
        FT --> TQ[Terms Query]
        FT --> DV[Doc Values]
    end
    
    QB --> EH
    QR --> FT
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| ExistsQueryBuilder | Builds exists queries for fields, handles object fields with subfields |
| QueryStringQueryBuilder | Parses query string syntax with field validation |
| IpFieldMapper | Handles IP field indexing and querying including CIDR notation |
| ExceptionsHelper | Maps exceptions to appropriate HTTP status codes |
| MatrixStatsAggregator | Computes matrix statistics across multiple fields |

### Configuration

No specific configuration required. These are core query processing improvements.

### Usage Example

```json
// Exists query on object field with derived subfields
PUT test
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "log": {
        "properties": {
          "request": { "type": "text" }
        }
      }
    },
    "derived": {
      "log.timestamp": {
        "type": "date",
        "script": { "source": "emit(params._source.log.request)" }
      }
    }
  }
}

POST test/_search
{
  "query": {
    "exists": { "field": "log" }
  }
}

// IP terms query with many CIDR ranges
POST test/_search
{
  "query": {
    "terms": {
      "client_ip": [
        "192.168.0.0/16",
        "10.0.0.0/8",
        "172.16.0.0/12"
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

## Limitations

- Derived fields do not support exists queries; they are silently skipped when querying parent object fields
- The IP field enhancement requires Lucene 10.2+ for `DocValuesMultiRangeQuery` support
- Complex wildcard patterns may hit `TooComplexToDeterminizeException` if the automaton exceeds the determinization work limit

## Related PRs

| Version | PR | Description |
|---------|-----|-------------|
| v3.4.0 | [#19489](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/19489) | Fix case-insensitive wildcard + aggregation query crash |
| v3.4.0 | [#19637](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/19637) | Fix IndexOutOfBoundsException when running include/exclude on non-existent prefix in terms aggregations |
| v3.4.0 | [#19442](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/19442) | Fix Unified highlighter for nested fields when using matchPhrasePrefixQuery |
| v3.4.0 | [#19650](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/19650) | Fix NPE of ScriptScoreQuery |
| v3.4.0 | [#20204](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/20204) | Fix array out of bounds during aggregation |
| v3.4.0 | [#19719](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/19719) | Fix wildcard query with escaped backslash followed by wildcard character |
| v3.1.0 | [#17843](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/17843) | Fix object field exists query |
| v3.1.0 | [#18161](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18161) | Use Bad Request status for InputCoercionException |
| v3.1.0 | [#18194](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18194) | Null check field names in QueryStringQueryBuilder |
| v3.1.0 | [#18357](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18357) | DocValues-only IP field supports terms_query with >1025 IP masks |
| v3.1.0 | [#18242](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/pull/18242) | Fix MatrixStatsAggregator reuse when mode parameter changes |

## References

- [Issue #19319](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/19319): Error when use both wildcard + aggregation
- [Issue #19636](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/19636): Include/Exclude on terms aggregation can cause IndexOutOfBoundsException
- [Issue #19106](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/19106): Unified highlighter does not highlight nested fields when match_phrase_prefix is used
- [Issue #18446](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/18446): Null pointer exception on a term filter nested inside a script score
- [Issue #19365](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/19365): array_index_out_of_bounds_exception on aggregations with unsigned_long
- [Issue #17808](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/17808): Object Field exists query returns wrong result
- [Issue #18131](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/18131): XContent parsing exceptions return 500 status
- [Issue #17394](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/17394): Unlimit IP/masks terms query for doc_values only fields
- [Query string documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/query-dsl/full-text/query-string/)

## Change History

- **v3.4.0** (2026-01-11): Six bug fixes for wildcard queries, aggregations, highlighters, and script score queries
- **v3.1.0** (2026-01-10): Initial implementation with five bug fixes for query handling
