docs/features/observability/observability-integrations.md, before:

---
tags:
  - observability
---
# Observability Integrations

## Summary

Integrations is a feature in OpenSearch Dashboards that provides pre-packaged data visualization, querying, and monitoring capabilities for various data sources. Integration assets bundle metadata, data mappings, and visualizations to streamline observability monitoring without redundant configuration.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "OpenSearch Dashboards"
        UI[Integrations UI]
        IM[Integration Manager]
    end
    
    subgraph "Integration Assets"
        Config[Configuration JSON]
        Assets[Saved Objects]
        Schema[Index Mappings]
        Static[Static Files]
    end
    
    subgraph "Data Adaptors"
        FSA[FileSystem Adaptor]
        JCA[JSON Catalog Adaptor]
    end
    
    subgraph "Repository"
        IR[Integration Reader]
        TM[Template Manager]
        Utils[Utilities]
    end
    
    UI --> IM
    IM --> TM
    TM --> IR
    IR --> FSA
    IR --> JCA
    FSA --> Config
    FSA --> Assets
    FSA --> Schema
    FSA --> Static
    JCA --> Config
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    A[User] --> B[Select Integration]
    B --> C[Load Config]
    C --> D{Validate}
    D -->|Valid| E[Load Assets]
    D -->|Invalid| F[Show Error]
    E --> G[Create Index Pattern]
    G --> H[Import Dashboards]
    H --> I[Ready to Use]
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `IntegrationReader` | Reads and parses integration configuration and assets |
| `TemplateManager` | Manages available integration templates |
| `FileSystemDataAdaptor` | Reads integrations from local filesystem |
| `JsonCatalogDataAdaptor` | Reads integrations from serialized JSON catalog |
| `deepCheck()` | Validates integration configuration and assets |
| `foldResults()` | Combines multiple Result objects into a single result |

### Configuration

Integration assets contain the following structure:

| Setting | Description | Required |
|---------|-------------|----------|
| `name` | Integration identifier | Yes |
| `version` | Semantic version | Yes |
| `description` | Human-readable description | Yes |
| `license` | License type | Yes |
| `type` | Integration type | Yes |
| `assets` | Array of asset definitions | Yes |
| `statics` | Static files (logos, screenshots) | No |
| `sampleData` | Sample data for testing | No |

### Usage Example

Installing an integration from the UI:

1. Navigate to **Integrations** > **Available**
2. Select an integration (e.g., Nginx, Amazon VPC)
3. Click **Add** to configure or **Try it** to test with sample data
4. View created dashboards and visualizations

Loading a custom integration:

```bash
# Download integration artifact
curl -O https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-catalog/releases/download/v1.0.0/nginx.ndjson

# Import via Dashboards Management > Saved Objects > Import
```

## Limitations

- Integration assets must conform to the supported schema
- Custom integrations require manual import through Saved Objects
- Data must be ingested using compatible pipelines (Data Prepper, OpenTelemetry Collector, Fluent Bit)

## Change History

- **v3.4.0** (2026-01-14): Improved static file serving with image type validation and SVG sanitization
- **v3.0.0** (2025-05-06): Improved error handling and test result quality for integration configuration parsing
- **v2.19.0** (2025-01-09): Added comprehensive SOP documentation for Integration and Vended Dashboards Setup


## References

### Documentation
- [Integrations in OpenSearch Dashboards](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/dashboards/integrations/index/): Official documentation
- [OpenSearch Integrations Repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-catalog): Source code and integration assets
- [Simple Schema for Observability](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-catalog/tree/main/docs/schema/observability): Schema specification

### Pull Requests
| Version | PR | Description | Related Issue |
|---------|-----|-------------|---------------|
| v3.4.0 | [#2530](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-observability/pull/2530) | Clean up interface for integrations static serving |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#2387](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-observability/pull/2387) | Improve error handling when setting up and reading a new integration |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#2376](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-observability/pull/2376) | Improve the test results for Integrations internals |   |
| v2.19.0 | [#2299](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-observability/pull/2299) | SOP for Integration and Vended Dashboards Setup |   |

Commit message:

docs: add observability-integration report for v3.5.0

docs/features/observability/observability-integrations.md, after:

---
tags:
  - observability
---
# Observability Integrations

## Summary

Integrations is a feature in OpenSearch Dashboards that provides pre-packaged data visualization, querying, and monitoring capabilities for various data sources. Integration assets bundle metadata, data mappings, and visualizations to streamline observability monitoring without redundant configuration.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "OpenSearch Dashboards"
        UI[Integrations UI]
        IM[Integration Manager]
    end
    
    subgraph "Integration Assets"
        Config[Configuration JSON]
        Assets[Saved Objects]
        Schema[Index Mappings]
        Static[Static Files]
    end
    
    subgraph "Data Adaptors"
        FSA[FileSystem Adaptor]
        JCA[JSON Catalog Adaptor]
    end
    
    subgraph "Repository"
        IR[Integration Reader]
        TM[Template Manager]
        Utils[Utilities]
    end
    
    UI --> IM
    IM --> TM
    TM --> IR
    IR --> FSA
    IR --> JCA
    FSA --> Config
    FSA --> Assets
    FSA --> Schema
    FSA --> Static
    JCA --> Config
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    A[User] --> B[Select Integration]
    B --> C[Load Config]
    C --> D{Validate}
    D -->|Valid| E[Load Assets]
    D -->|Invalid| F[Show Error]
    E --> G[Create Index Pattern]
    G --> H[Import Dashboards]
    H --> I[Ready to Use]
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `IntegrationReader` | Reads and parses integration configuration and assets |
| `TemplateManager` | Manages available integration templates |
| `FileSystemDataAdaptor` | Reads integrations from local filesystem |
| `JsonCatalogDataAdaptor` | Reads integrations from serialized JSON catalog |
| `deepCheck()` | Validates integration configuration and assets |
| `foldResults()` | Combines multiple Result objects into a single result |

### Configuration

Integration assets contain the following structure:

| Setting | Description | Required |
|---------|-------------|----------|
| `name` | Integration identifier | Yes |
| `version` | Semantic version | Yes |
| `description` | Human-readable description | Yes |
| `license` | License type | Yes |
| `type` | Integration type | Yes |
| `assets` | Array of asset definitions | Yes |
| `statics` | Static files (logos, screenshots) | No |
| `sampleData` | Sample data for testing | No |

### Usage Example

Installing an integration from the UI:

1. Navigate to **Integrations** > **Available**
2. Select an integration (e.g., Nginx, Amazon VPC)
3. Click **Add** to configure or **Try it** to test with sample data
4. View created dashboards and visualizations

Loading a custom integration:

```bash
# Download integration artifact
curl -O https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-catalog/releases/download/v1.0.0/nginx.ndjson

# Import via Dashboards Management > Saved Objects > Import
```

## Limitations

- Integration assets must conform to the supported schema
- Custom integrations require manual import through Saved Objects
- Data must be ingested using compatible pipelines (Data Prepper, OpenTelemetry Collector, Fluent Bit)
- Initial Data Range feature requires `@timestamp` field in MV schema

## Change History

- **v3.5.0** (2026-02-11): Added Initial Data Range feature for MV creation with date picker UI
- **v3.4.0** (2026-01-14): Improved static file serving with image type validation and SVG sanitization
- **v3.0.0** (2025-05-06): Improved error handling and test result quality for integration configuration parsing
- **v2.19.0** (2025-01-09): Added comprehensive SOP documentation for Integration and Vended Dashboards Setup


## References

### Documentation
- [Integrations in OpenSearch Dashboards](https://docs.opensearch.org/3.0/dashboards/integrations/index/): Official documentation
- [OpenSearch Integrations Repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-catalog): Source code and integration assets
- [Simple Schema for Observability](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-catalog/tree/main/docs/schema/observability): Schema specification

### Pull Requests
| Version | PR | Description | Related Issue |
|---------|-----|-------------|---------------|
| v3.5.0 | [#2546](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-observability/pull/2546) | Implement 1st MV Refresh Window For Integration | [#2506](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-observability/issues/2506) |
| v3.5.0 | [#11226](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/11226) | Implement 1st MV Refresh Window For Integration Creation (OSD) | [#11227](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/issues/11227) |
| v3.4.0 | [#2530](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-observability/pull/2530) | Clean up interface for integrations static serving |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#2387](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-observability/pull/2387) | Improve error handling when setting up and reading a new integration |   |
| v3.0.0 | [#2376](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-observability/pull/2376) | Improve the test results for Integrations internals |   |
| v2.19.0 | [#2299](https://github.com/opensearch-project/dashboards-observability/pull/2299) | SOP for Integration and Vended Dashboards Setup |   |
