docs/features/k-nn/k-nn-performance-engine.md, before:

---
tags:
  - k-nn
---
# k-NN Performance & Engine

## Summary

The k-NN plugin provides approximate k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) search capabilities in OpenSearch. It supports multiple engines (FAISS, NMSLIB, Lucene) for building and searching vector indexes. This feature encompasses performance optimizations, engine selection, memory management, and rescoring mechanisms that enable efficient vector similarity search at scale.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "k-NN Plugin Architecture"
        Query[k-NN Query] --> QP[Query Parser]
        QP --> Router{Threshold Check}
        Router -->|docs < threshold| Exact[Exact Search]
        Router -->|docs >= threshold| Approx[Approximate Search]
        
        subgraph "Engines"
            Approx --> FAISS[FAISS Engine]
            Approx --> NMSLIB[NMSLIB Engine]
            Approx --> Lucene[Lucene Engine]
        end
        
        FAISS --> Rescore[Rescoring Layer]
        NMSLIB --> Rescore
        Lucene --> Rescore
        Exact --> Results[Results]
        Rescore --> Results
    end
    
    subgraph "Memory Management"
        Segment[Segment Close] --> DVP[DocValuesProducer]
        DVP --> Cache[Native Cache]
        Cache --> Release[Memory Release]
    end
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph "Indexing Flow"
        Doc[Document] --> Vector[Vector Extraction]
        Vector --> Check{Threshold Check}
        Check -->|Below threshold| Store[Store Only]
        Check -->|Above threshold| Build[Build Graph]
        Build --> Native[Native Index]
    end
    
    subgraph "Search Flow"
        SQ[Search Query] --> Shard[Shard Search]
        Shard --> Segment[Segment Search]
        Segment --> TopK[Top-K per Segment]
        TopK --> Merge[Merge Results]
        Merge --> Oversample{Rescoring?}
        Oversample -->|Yes| Rescore[Rescore with Full Vectors]
        Oversample -->|No| Final[Final Results]
        Rescore --> Final
    end
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `KNNQueryBuilder` | Builds k-NN queries with parameters like k, filter, and method parameters |
| `KNNWeight` | Lucene Weight implementation for k-NN scoring |
| `KNNIterators` | Iterators for traversing vectors with optional filtering |
| `RescoreContext` | Manages rescoring parameters including oversampling factor |
| `KNN80DocValuesProducer` | Handles memory release when segments are closed |
| `NativeEngineIndex` | Interface for native library index operations |
| `ResultUtil` | Utility for reducing results to top-K |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `knn.default.engine` | Default engine for new k-NN indexes | `faiss` |
| `index.knn` | Enable k-NN on the index | `false` |
| `index.knn.advanced.approximate_threshold` | Document count threshold for approximate search | `15000` |
| `index.knn.advanced.shard_level_rescoring_disabled` | Disable shard-level rescoring | `false` |
| `knn.algo_param.index_thread_qty` | Number of threads for index construction | System dependent |
| `knn.memory.circuit_breaker.limit` | Memory limit for native indexes | `50%` |
| `knn.memory.circuit_breaker.enabled` | Enable memory circuit breaker | `true` |

### Engine Comparison

| Feature | FAISS | NMSLIB | Lucene |
|---------|-------|--------|--------|
| Default (v2.18+) | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |
| Binary Quantization | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |
| Product Quantization | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |
| Scalar Quantization | ✅ | ❌ | ✅ |
| SIMD Support | ✅ (Linux) | ✅ | ✅ |
| Disk-based Search | ✅ | ❌ | ✅ |
| Indexing Throughput | High | Medium | Medium |
| Search Latency | Low | Very Low | Low |

### Rescoring Mechanism

The rescoring mechanism improves recall by oversampling candidates and re-ranking with full precision vectors:

| Dimension Range | Oversampling Factor | Use Case |
|-----------------|---------------------|----------|
| dim < 768 | 3.0x | Small embeddings (e.g., word2vec) |
| 768 ≤ dim ≤ 1000 | 2.0x | Standard embeddings (e.g., BERT) |
| dim > 1000 | 1.0x | Large embeddings (e.g., multimodal) |

### Usage Example

```yaml
# Index creation with FAISS engine
PUT /products-vectors
{
  "settings": {
    "index": {
      "knn": true,
      "knn.advanced.approximate_threshold": 15000
    }
  },
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "product_embedding": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 768,
        "method": {
          "name": "hnsw",
          "engine": "faiss",
          "space_type": "l2",
          "parameters": {
            "ef_construction": 256,
            "m": 16
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

```json
// Search query
GET /products-vectors/_search
{
  "size": 10,
  "query": {
    "knn": {
      "product_embedding": {
        "vector": [0.1, 0.2, ...],
        "k": 10
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Limitations

- SIMD optimization for FAISS is only available on Linux
- Binary quantization uses Hamming distance only
- Compression levels above 32x are capped at 32x for oversampling
- Memory circuit breaker may reject queries under high load
- Exact search performance degrades with large document counts

## Change History

- **v2.18.0** (2024-11-05): Default engine changed to FAISS, approximate threshold updated to 15K, rescoring improvements, memory management enhancements


## References

### Documentation
- [k-NN Search Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.18/search-plugins/knn/index/): Official k-NN plugin documentation
- [k-NN Performance Tuning](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.18/search-plugins/knn/performance-tuning/): Performance optimization guide
- [k-NN Index Configuration](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.18/search-plugins/knn/knn-index/): Index settings and mappings
- [k-NN Vector Quantization](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.18/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization/): Quantization options

### Pull Requests
| Version | PR | Description | Related Issue |
|---------|-----|-------------|---------------|
| v2.18.0 | [#2221](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2221) | Update default engine to FAISS |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#2229](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2229) | Update approximate_threshold to 15K |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#2172](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2172) | Shard-level rescoring control |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#2149](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2149) | Dimension-based rescore context |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#2059](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2059) | Short circuit for empty segments |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#2146](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2146) | Optimize reduceToTopK | [#2145](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2145) |
| v2.18.0 | [#2155](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2155) | KNNIterators filter support |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#2200](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2200) | PQ compression level calculation |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#2182](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2182) | Remove FSDirectory dependency | [#1885](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1885) |
| v2.18.0 | [#1946](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/1946) | DocValuesProducers for memory release | [#1885](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1885) |
| v2.18.0 | [#2147](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2147) | KNN80DocValues fix |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#2183](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2183) | Binary quantized vector score fix |   |

### Issues (Design / RFC)
- [Issue #1885](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1885): Memory release improvements
- [Issue #2163](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2163): Default engine change

Commit message:

docs: add k-nn-serialization report for v2.16.0

docs/features/k-nn/k-nn-performance-engine.md, after:

---
tags:
  - k-nn
---
# k-NN Performance & Engine

## Summary

The k-NN plugin provides approximate k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) search capabilities in OpenSearch. It supports multiple engines (FAISS, NMSLIB, Lucene) for building and searching vector indexes. This feature encompasses performance optimizations, engine selection, memory management, and rescoring mechanisms that enable efficient vector similarity search at scale.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "k-NN Plugin Architecture"
        Query[k-NN Query] --> QP[Query Parser]
        QP --> Router{Threshold Check}
        Router -->|docs < threshold| Exact[Exact Search]
        Router -->|docs >= threshold| Approx[Approximate Search]
        
        subgraph "Engines"
            Approx --> FAISS[FAISS Engine]
            Approx --> NMSLIB[NMSLIB Engine]
            Approx --> Lucene[Lucene Engine]
        end
        
        FAISS --> Rescore[Rescoring Layer]
        NMSLIB --> Rescore
        Lucene --> Rescore
        Exact --> Results[Results]
        Rescore --> Results
    end
    
    subgraph "Memory Management"
        Segment[Segment Close] --> DVP[DocValuesProducer]
        DVP --> Cache[Native Cache]
        Cache --> Release[Memory Release]
    end
```

### Data Flow

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph "Indexing Flow"
        Doc[Document] --> Vector[Vector Extraction]
        Vector --> Check{Threshold Check}
        Check -->|Below threshold| Store[Store Only]
        Check -->|Above threshold| Build[Build Graph]
        Build --> Native[Native Index]
    end
    
    subgraph "Search Flow"
        SQ[Search Query] --> Shard[Shard Search]
        Shard --> Segment[Segment Search]
        Segment --> TopK[Top-K per Segment]
        TopK --> Merge[Merge Results]
        Merge --> Oversample{Rescoring?}
        Oversample -->|Yes| Rescore[Rescore with Full Vectors]
        Oversample -->|No| Final[Final Results]
        Rescore --> Final
    end
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `KNNQueryBuilder` | Builds k-NN queries with parameters like k, filter, and method parameters |
| `KNNWeight` | Lucene Weight implementation for k-NN scoring |
| `KNNIterators` | Iterators for traversing vectors with optional filtering |
| `RescoreContext` | Manages rescoring parameters including oversampling factor |
| `KNN80DocValuesProducer` | Handles memory release when segments are closed |
| `NativeEngineIndex` | Interface for native library index operations |
| `ResultUtil` | Utility for reducing results to top-K |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `knn.default.engine` | Default engine for new k-NN indexes | `faiss` |
| `index.knn` | Enable k-NN on the index | `false` |
| `index.knn.advanced.approximate_threshold` | Document count threshold for approximate search | `15000` |
| `index.knn.advanced.shard_level_rescoring_disabled` | Disable shard-level rescoring | `false` |
| `knn.algo_param.index_thread_qty` | Number of threads for index construction | System dependent |
| `knn.memory.circuit_breaker.limit` | Memory limit for native indexes | `50%` |
| `knn.memory.circuit_breaker.enabled` | Enable memory circuit breaker | `true` |

### Engine Comparison

| Feature | FAISS | NMSLIB | Lucene |
|---------|-------|--------|--------|
| Default (v2.18+) | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |
| Binary Quantization | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |
| Product Quantization | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |
| Scalar Quantization | ✅ | ❌ | ✅ |
| SIMD Support | ✅ (Linux) | ✅ | ✅ |
| Disk-based Search | ✅ | ❌ | ✅ |
| Indexing Throughput | High | Medium | Medium |
| Search Latency | Low | Very Low | Low |

### Rescoring Mechanism

The rescoring mechanism improves recall by oversampling candidates and re-ranking with full precision vectors:

| Dimension Range | Oversampling Factor | Use Case |
|-----------------|---------------------|----------|
| dim < 768 | 3.0x | Small embeddings (e.g., word2vec) |
| 768 ≤ dim ≤ 1000 | 2.0x | Standard embeddings (e.g., BERT) |
| dim > 1000 | 1.0x | Large embeddings (e.g., multimodal) |

### Usage Example

```yaml
# Index creation with FAISS engine
PUT /products-vectors
{
  "settings": {
    "index": {
      "knn": true,
      "knn.advanced.approximate_threshold": 15000
    }
  },
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "product_embedding": {
        "type": "knn_vector",
        "dimension": 768,
        "method": {
          "name": "hnsw",
          "engine": "faiss",
          "space_type": "l2",
          "parameters": {
            "ef_construction": 256,
            "m": 16
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

```json
// Search query
GET /products-vectors/_search
{
  "size": 10,
  "query": {
    "knn": {
      "product_embedding": {
        "vector": [0.1, 0.2, ...],
        "k": 10
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Limitations

- SIMD optimization for FAISS is only available on Linux
- Binary quantization uses Hamming distance only
- Compression levels above 32x are capped at 32x for oversampling
- Memory circuit breaker may reject queries under high load
- Exact search performance degrades with large document counts

## Change History

- **v2.18.0** (2024-11-05): Default engine changed to FAISS, approximate threshold updated to 15K, rescoring improvements, memory management enhancements
- **v2.16.0** (2024-08-06): Serialization optimization - switched from byte streams to byte refs, improving exact search performance by 15-20%


## References

### Documentation
- [k-NN Search Documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.18/search-plugins/knn/index/): Official k-NN plugin documentation
- [k-NN Performance Tuning](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.18/search-plugins/knn/performance-tuning/): Performance optimization guide
- [k-NN Index Configuration](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.18/search-plugins/knn/knn-index/): Index settings and mappings
- [k-NN Vector Quantization](https://docs.opensearch.org/2.18/search-plugins/knn/knn-vector-quantization/): Quantization options

### Pull Requests
| Version | PR | Description | Related Issue |
|---------|-----|-------------|---------------|
| v2.18.0 | [#2221](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2221) | Update default engine to FAISS |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#2229](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2229) | Update approximate_threshold to 15K |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#2172](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2172) | Shard-level rescoring control |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#2149](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2149) | Dimension-based rescore context |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#2059](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2059) | Short circuit for empty segments |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#2146](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2146) | Optimize reduceToTopK | [#2145](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2145) |
| v2.18.0 | [#2155](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2155) | KNNIterators filter support |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#2200](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2200) | PQ compression level calculation |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#2182](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2182) | Remove FSDirectory dependency | [#1885](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1885) |
| v2.18.0 | [#1946](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/1946) | DocValuesProducers for memory release | [#1885](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1885) |
| v2.18.0 | [#2147](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2147) | KNN80DocValues fix |   |
| v2.18.0 | [#2183](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2183) | Binary quantized vector score fix |   |
| v2.16.0 | [#1825](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/1825) | Switch from byte stream to byte ref for serde | [#1736](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1736) |

### Issues (Design / RFC)
- [Issue #1885](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/1885): Memory release improvements
- [Issue #2163](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2163): Default engine change
