docs/features/k-nn/k-nn-build.md, before:

---
tags:
  - k-nn
---
# k-NN Build Infrastructure

## Summary

The k-NN plugin build infrastructure manages the compilation and packaging of native libraries (FAISS, NMSLIB, SIMD) for vector search operations. It includes support for multiple CPU instruction sets (AVX2, AVX512, AVX512_SPR) and integrates with the OpenSearch CI/CD pipeline for snapshot publishing.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Build Process"
        GR[Gradle Build] --> JNI[JNI Library Build]
        JNI --> BASE[Base Libraries]
        JNI --> AVX2[AVX2 Libraries]
        JNI --> AVX512[AVX512 Libraries]
        JNI --> SPR[AVX512_SPR Libraries]
    end
    
    subgraph "Native Libraries"
        BASE --> FAISS_BASE[opensearchknn_faiss]
        BASE --> SIMD_BASE[opensearchknn_simd]
        BASE --> NMSLIB[opensearchknn_nmslib]
        AVX2 --> FAISS_AVX2[opensearchknn_faiss_avx2]
        AVX2 --> SIMD_AVX2[opensearchknn_simd_avx2]
        AVX512 --> FAISS_512[opensearchknn_faiss_avx512]
        AVX512 --> SIMD_512[opensearchknn_simd_avx512]
        SPR --> FAISS_SPR[opensearchknn_faiss_avx512_spr]
        SPR --> SIMD_SPR[opensearchknn_simd_avx512_spr]
    end
    
    subgraph "Publishing"
        GR --> PUB[Maven Publish]
        PUB --> S3[S3 Snapshots Repository]
    end
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `scripts/build.sh` | Main build script for compiling native libraries |
| `build.gradle` | Gradle configuration for plugin build and publishing |
| `build-tools/repositories.gradle` | Maven repository configuration |
| `plugin-security.policy` | Security permissions for native library loading |

### Native Libraries

| Library | Description | AVX Variants |
|---------|-------------|--------------|
| `opensearchknn_faiss` | FAISS vector search library | Base, AVX2, AVX512, AVX512_SPR |
| `opensearchknn_simd` | SIMD-optimized operations | Base, AVX2, AVX512, AVX512_SPR |
| `opensearchknn_nmslib` | NMSLIB vector search library | Base only |
| `opensearchknn_common` | Common utilities | Base only |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `knn_libs` | Libraries to build | `opensearchknn_faiss,opensearchknn_simd` |
| `avx2.enabled` | Enable AVX2 build | `false` |
| `avx512.enabled` | Enable AVX512 build | `false` |
| `avx512_spr.enabled` | Enable AVX512 Sapphire Rapids build | `false` |
| `nproc.count` | Number of parallel build processes | `1` |

### Build Commands

```bash
# Build base libraries (no AVX optimization)
./gradlew :buildJniLib -Pknn_libs=opensearchknn_faiss,opensearchknn_simd \
    -Davx512.enabled=false -Davx512_spr.enabled=false -Davx2.enabled=false

# Build with AVX2 optimization
./gradlew :buildJniLib -Pknn_libs=opensearchknn_faiss,opensearchknn_simd \
    -Davx2.enabled=true -Davx512.enabled=false -Davx512_spr.enabled=false

# Build with AVX512 optimization
./gradlew :buildJniLib -Pknn_libs=opensearchknn_faiss,opensearchknn_simd \
    -Davx512.enabled=true -Davx512_spr.enabled=false

# Build with AVX512 Sapphire Rapids optimization
./gradlew :buildJniLib -Pknn_libs=opensearchknn_faiss,opensearchknn_simd \
    -Davx512_spr.enabled=true
```

### Maven Repository Configuration

The k-NN plugin uses the OpenSearch S3 repository for snapshot publishing:

```groovy
repositories {
    mavenLocal()
    maven { url "https://ci.opensearch.org/ci/dbc/snapshots/maven/" }
    mavenCentral()
    maven { url "https://plugins.gradle.org/m2/" }
}
```

### Security Permissions

The plugin requires runtime permissions to load native libraries:

```
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_nmslib";
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_faiss";
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_common";
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_simd";
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_simd_avx2";
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_simd_avx512";
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_simd_avx512_spr";
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_faiss_avx2";
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_faiss_avx512";
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_faiss_avx512_spr";
```

## Limitations

- SIMD and AVX optimizations are only available on x64 architectures
- AVX512 Sapphire Rapids requires compatible Intel processors
- NMSLIB does not have AVX-optimized variants
- S3 snapshot publishing requires AWS credentials (handled by CI/CD)

## Change History

- **v3.4.0** (2026-01-11): Added SIMD library to build configurations; migrated to S3 snapshots repository


## References

### Pull Requests
| Version | PR | Description | Related Issue |
|---------|-----|-------------|---------------|
| v3.4.0 | [#3025](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/3025) | Include opensearchknn_simd in build configurations |   |
| v3.4.0 | [#2943](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2943) | Onboard to S3 snapshots | [#5360](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-build/issues/5360) |

### Issues (Design / RFC)
- [Issue #5360](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-build/issues/5360): Migration from Sonatype snapshots repo to ci.opensearch.org snapshots repo

Commit message:

docs: add k-NN Build & Patches report for v2.16.0

docs/features/k-nn/k-nn-build.md, after:

---
tags:
  - k-nn
---
# k-NN Build Infrastructure

## Summary

The k-NN plugin build infrastructure manages the compilation and packaging of native libraries (FAISS, NMSLIB, SIMD) for vector search operations. It includes support for multiple CPU instruction sets (AVX2, AVX512, AVX512_SPR) and integrates with the OpenSearch CI/CD pipeline for snapshot publishing.

## Details

### Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Build Process"
        GR[Gradle Build] --> JNI[JNI Library Build]
        JNI --> BASE[Base Libraries]
        JNI --> AVX2[AVX2 Libraries]
        JNI --> AVX512[AVX512 Libraries]
        JNI --> SPR[AVX512_SPR Libraries]
    end
    
    subgraph "Native Libraries"
        BASE --> FAISS_BASE[opensearchknn_faiss]
        BASE --> SIMD_BASE[opensearchknn_simd]
        BASE --> NMSLIB[opensearchknn_nmslib]
        AVX2 --> FAISS_AVX2[opensearchknn_faiss_avx2]
        AVX2 --> SIMD_AVX2[opensearchknn_simd_avx2]
        AVX512 --> FAISS_512[opensearchknn_faiss_avx512]
        AVX512 --> SIMD_512[opensearchknn_simd_avx512]
        SPR --> FAISS_SPR[opensearchknn_faiss_avx512_spr]
        SPR --> SIMD_SPR[opensearchknn_simd_avx512_spr]
    end
    
    subgraph "Publishing"
        GR --> PUB[Maven Publish]
        PUB --> S3[S3 Snapshots Repository]
    end
```

### Components

| Component | Description |
|-----------|-------------|
| `scripts/build.sh` | Main build script for compiling native libraries |
| `build.gradle` | Gradle configuration for plugin build and publishing |
| `build-tools/repositories.gradle` | Maven repository configuration |
| `plugin-security.policy` | Security permissions for native library loading |

### Native Libraries

| Library | Description | AVX Variants |
|---------|-------------|--------------|
| `opensearchknn_faiss` | FAISS vector search library | Base, AVX2, AVX512, AVX512_SPR |
| `opensearchknn_simd` | SIMD-optimized operations | Base, AVX2, AVX512, AVX512_SPR |
| `opensearchknn_nmslib` | NMSLIB vector search library | Base only |
| `opensearchknn_common` | Common utilities | Base only |

### Configuration

| Setting | Description | Default |
|---------|-------------|---------|
| `knn_libs` | Libraries to build | `opensearchknn_faiss,opensearchknn_simd` |
| `avx2.enabled` | Enable AVX2 build | `false` |
| `avx512.enabled` | Enable AVX512 build | `false` |
| `avx512_spr.enabled` | Enable AVX512 Sapphire Rapids build | `false` |
| `nproc.count` | Number of parallel build processes | `1` |

### Build Commands

```bash
# Build base libraries (no AVX optimization)
./gradlew :buildJniLib -Pknn_libs=opensearchknn_faiss,opensearchknn_simd \
    -Davx512.enabled=false -Davx512_spr.enabled=false -Davx2.enabled=false

# Build with AVX2 optimization
./gradlew :buildJniLib -Pknn_libs=opensearchknn_faiss,opensearchknn_simd \
    -Davx2.enabled=true -Davx512.enabled=false -Davx512_spr.enabled=false

# Build with AVX512 optimization
./gradlew :buildJniLib -Pknn_libs=opensearchknn_faiss,opensearchknn_simd \
    -Davx512.enabled=true -Davx512_spr.enabled=false

# Build with AVX512 Sapphire Rapids optimization
./gradlew :buildJniLib -Pknn_libs=opensearchknn_faiss,opensearchknn_simd \
    -Davx512_spr.enabled=true
```

### Maven Repository Configuration

The k-NN plugin uses the OpenSearch S3 repository for snapshot publishing:

```groovy
repositories {
    mavenLocal()
    maven { url "https://ci.opensearch.org/ci/dbc/snapshots/maven/" }
    mavenCentral()
    maven { url "https://plugins.gradle.org/m2/" }
}
```

### Security Permissions

The plugin requires runtime permissions to load native libraries:

```
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_nmslib";
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_faiss";
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_common";
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_simd";
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_simd_avx2";
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_simd_avx512";
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_simd_avx512_spr";
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_faiss_avx2";
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_faiss_avx512";
permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.opensearchknn_faiss_avx512_spr";
```

## Limitations

- SIMD and AVX optimizations are only available on x64 architectures
- AVX512 Sapphire Rapids requires compatible Intel processors
- NMSLIB does not have AVX-optimized variants
- S3 snapshot publishing requires AWS credentials (handled by CI/CD)

## Change History

- **v3.4.0** (2026-01-11): Added SIMD library to build configurations; migrated to S3 snapshots repository
- **v2.16.0** (2024-08-06): Fixed custom patch application to apply only once by comparing patch-id; updated developer guide for ARM (M-series) build instructions

## References

### Pull Requests
| Version | PR | Description | Related Issue |
|---------|-----|-------------|---------------|
| v3.4.0 | [#3025](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/3025) | Include opensearchknn_simd in build configurations |   |
| v3.4.0 | [#2943](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/2943) | Onboard to S3 snapshots | [#5360](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-build/issues/5360) |
| v2.16.0 | [#1833](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/1833) | Apply custom patch only once by comparing patch-id | - |
| v2.16.0 | [#1746](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/pull/1746) | Update dev guide to fix clang linking issue on ARM | - |

### Issues (Design / RFC)
- [Issue #5360](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-build/issues/5360): Migration from Sonatype snapshots repo to ci.opensearch.org snapshots repo
